Mank Review Old Hollywood Thrills and Eerie Political Chills      			Skip to main content		 Rollingstone LogoClick to expand the Mega MenuClick to Expand Search InputSearch for	Music	Politics	TV  Movies	SubCulture	RS Recommends	Got A Tip	Account	Welcome	Get Digital Access	Manage Digital Account	Manage Print Account	Sign Out	Log In	SubscribeClick to expand the Mega MenuClick to Expand Search InputSearch for Rollingstone Logo	TV  Movies								David Finchers Mank Brings Old Hollywood Thrills  and Eerie Political Chills					facebookrstwitteremail	Got A Tip	Account	Welcome	Get Digital Access	Manage Digital Account	Manage Print Account	Sign Out	Log In	Subscribe 						TV  Movies		 	 David Finchers Mank Brings Old Hollywood Thrills  and Eerie Political ChillsThe directors blackandwhite opus about the making of Citizen Kane is a both love letter to cinema and a timely cautionary tale about power							By 	K. Austin Collins								K. Austin Collins						Creed III Is a Muscular Punishing Statement on Race in America	A Terrifying Tale of a Teenage Girl Groomed Into Being Sex Trafficked	Cocaine Bear Has More Coke and Gore Than a Night With Charlie Sheen	View all posts by K. Austin Collins	November 12 2020	NetflixThe first surprise  was that David Fincher Hollywoods masterinfluencer of stylish impeccablydesigned thrillers was making a movie about the writing of a screenplay. A jarring matchup  even if the screenplay in question is Citizen Kane and even if the debate over Kanes authorship in which Orson Welles contribution became subject to questionis storied and vibrant enough its relationship to Hollywood history robust enough to merit a movie. The pairing of director and subject seemed curious a maybepromising prospect with a potential dash of latent misfire.The movie itself Mank  which will receive a limited theatrical release on Friday followed by a Netflix streaming release on December 4th  is the second greater surprise in large part because of its successes. Mank is Finchers eleventh feature the first since Gone Girls rigorous blackly comic bloodletting in 2014. Though the horizons of Finchers art have always been broader than they at first appear  this isnt even the intensively modern directors first period picture  Mank is somewhat unnerving in its sincerity and topical breadth its tense mingling of history and speculation its ironically pointed attitude toward the Hollywood studio system. This last point only gains more traction and intrigue in light of this movie being from the outset a production of Netflix International Pictures a fact somehow inseparable from the films congealed rash of ideas. Commerce art period politics Its all here. Among Fincher diehards the result will probably bemuse some bore many and thrill a relative but hearty minority. Count me in the minority. Mank stars an exceptionally loose and selftorturous Gary Oldman as the soggy bedridden hero of the title a man who as of the movies 1940 frame narrative has a major screenplay to finish writing and a barrel of demons to contend with in the meantime. The story goes that the wunderkind Welles only 25 or so years old has just been given carte blanche by RKO Pictures to make his first movie  any movie about anything with anyone he wants. So he chooses the washedup alcoholic gamblingaddicted Herman J. Mankiewicz the journalist critic and playwrightturnedstudio man whose Hollywood ties have by this time withered. A man who on Welles command can only be trusted to pull off this feat if hes been hidden away at the North Verde Ranch in Victorville California to complete the mammoth first draft.			Editors picks											The 250 Greatest Guitarists of All Time												The 500 Greatest Albums of All Time												The 50 Worst Decisions in Movie History												Every Awful Thing Trump Has Promised to Do in a Second Term			Mank has been assigned a trio of overseers caretaker Fraulein Freda Monika Grossman typist Rita Alexander Lily Collins and actorproducer John Houseman Sam Troughton whose main job is to keep Mank dry. This is a tough enough task that Houseman sets Mank up with a cache of sedatives in alcohol bottles. Mank is on deadline First hes given 90 days then 60 to pop this out. But as Finchers film allows it to play out the time nearly evaporates. Its not so long before seemingly all of a sudden the embattled Mank has only two weeks left to make sense of a draft thats as brilliant as it is overlong unconventional and  given who everyone rightly presumes it to be about  dangerous.That last part the danger is what gives Mank some only some of the tingly chaos youd expect of a Fincher movie. The threat isnt exactly comparable to the Zodiac killer its definitely no Amazing Amy who is. But whats clear from the outset is that theres a great risk being taken in the writing of Welles movie. There isnt a soul in the room who doesnt know that Kane is a standin for media titan William Randolph Hearst. A few people  including Manks brother the soontobelegendary writerproducer Joseph L. Mankiewicz Tom Pelphrey  even try to lure Herman ashore with safer projects easier money. One of Manks key swerves is in fact its willingness to give credence to the danger of that operation. And it splits itself nearly in two to do so with the Victorville frame narrative serving as but a backbone for a conflictridden vibrant tour of the years leading up to it. The real meat of Mank isnt in the writing of Citizen Kane in other words but in its detailing of the ideas and experiences the intellectual wrestling and brewing antagonisms that Mank will metastasize in his behemoth script. Its not so unusual for a film hovering anywhere near the biopic genre to make legible connections between the ideals of its hero and the experiences that shaped those ideals. But in Mank the extensive flashbacks to the 1930s are so dominant that they nearly serve as an alternate present tense. Here Hermans studio past  his ties to the likes of actress Marion Davies Amanda Seyfried studio giant Louis B. Mayer Arliss Howard and Hearst himself Charles Dance  are rife with a sense of contingency at times even despair. The past in this movie surpasses its function as mere explanation for its heros present. Hollywood of the 1930s emerges instead as the pulpy stirring heart of this story.			Related											Einstein and the Bomb Hits What Oppenheimer Left Out												Girls5Eva Reuniting for Third Season... This Time on Netflix			And the story this movie tells is a tough and disconcertingly relevant one. We watch as the beleaguered Mank a wry and magnetic wit unassumingly talks himself into the steady company of Davies thus quickly becoming a regular guest of Hearst  Davies partner  at a time when the media magnate has made serious headway into the talkingpicture business. We and Mank soon learn what propels Hearsts interest. In a word power. And peering over Manks shoulder through it all we come to see Mayer as the Sancho to Hearsts Quixote. Through lively and extensive dinner scenes and walkandtalks and vigorous arguments Mank encourages us to witness the ways that Hearst has begun to wield Hollywood as the political vehicle that in Manks gimleteyed view it practically begged to become  a way of intervening on socialist politics represented here by the political campaign of Upton Sinclair. Hearst has already played a direct hand in national politics by way of the Roosevelt White House. Thus his influence and reach grow terrifying  if quietly so. News from overseas portends great trouble from Germany war a crippled economy and the increased susceptibility of the public to the power of images hobble and shape citizens overall impression of the state of the world. And Mank court jester though he may seem when hanging out at Hearsts San Simeon palace seems to see all of it coming. That friends is the magic of the movies. As Mank puts it more than once our willingness to suspend our belief at the door  to believe in King Kong towering the heights of the Empire State Building when those silverscreen images are flickering above our heads or from our TV screens  is what keeps Hollywood in business and simultaneously risks making sitting ducks of us all. One of the surprising subjects of Mank is thus its insistence on the role of movies in shaping public understanding an idea that matters very much to the Mank Fincher has dreamed up in this movie. Its a wellknown story as essential to the myth of Herman Mankiewicz as it is to the Hollywood studio system of the 1930s that Mank who was at one point a recruiter of writers into this thankless machine sent then upandcomer now legend Ben Hecht a telegram that read Millions are to be grabbed out here and your only competition is idiots. And then Dont let this get around. The Hollywood of Finchers Mank is in fact not quite a haven of idiots one triumph of the movie however is that you see how Mank got there. You also grow to understand that Manks Hollywood was a repository of dangerously entangled rich shameless people. Effective people. Powerful people.Mank doesnt tell us why Welles chooses Mank of all men to script his Hollywood debut. The movie is in fact tellingly scant on impressions of Welles  though when he appears as played by Tom Burke the movie makes it count. But theres an idea that unites these men the idea of Hollywoods allure its power to lure men like Mank Welles and countless others into the dream factory where what awaits are not big chances at challenging ideas and personal art but rather a monied politicized wellrun machine. Its in the context of all of this that the filmmaking goodies here  the use of oldschool mono sound the widescreen blackandwhite images expressionistic smoky silhouettes Big Acting Thirtiesappropriate wit in the writing  feel not only playful but gilded knowing and pleasurably awry. Fincher hasnt quite made a genuine imitation of a 1930s picture. Fincher can hop genres but he can never abandon his masterfully clinical visual stamps which include all of the playful imitationfilm cigarette burns and graininess mussing the hair of the movies glossy digital images. He has instead used that acute visual cynicism of his to deliver something too sticky and uncomfortable to be straightforward nostalgia. Thats a credit to his intentions here frankly given that hes of the nostalgic movieobsessive New Hollywoodweaned auteur generation. But the movie is fun and its nostalgia is pleasurable if you allow it to be. Its something of an uphill battle at first. The opening 30 or so minutes risk confusion and disorientation in scenes that dont always hit the mark. Then Mank meets Davies as if by chance as shes slowburning at the stake between takes on a movie set. Seyfried isnt an exact match for Davies but she has great fun with Brooklynborn actress slick accent and personality. Davies emphatic presence here is poignant to begin with the character in Citizen Kane presumed to be based on her who was moneyhungry and talentless ruined her reallife reputation  painful proof of Manks concern about silver screen fictions overtaking reality. Seyfried gives Davies a soul Mank gives Seyfried just enough room to do so. Likewise Hearst Mayer the brother Mankiewicz and a gaggle of namechecked studio legends are all given real energy and life in performances that are to a person tantalizing and memorable. Theres blood in the veins of these people who just as easily could have become talky platforms for the movies ideas. Certainly theyre all representative of whats at stake here. But theyre fun to watch.Which is a good thing for a movie that seems destined to generate  has in fact already generated  some suspicion. Again theres the problem of history. The debate over who actually wrote Citizen Kane dates back to at least Pauline Kaels 1971 missive originally published in the New Yorker casting doubts as to Welles being the dominant author. It was heartily debunked. But a movie that pushes Manks efforts to the forefront and restricts Welles to a few pointed scenes with a nod toward the revisions that the director would later make that doesnt specify the extent of those revisions might appear tobe flirting with the murkier side of that debate.Even this as the movie explores it isnt so simple if anything the movies closing moments which jump forward to the culminating Academy Award shared by both men for the script wink at this very question. All of which is to say nothing of the fact that the Orson Welles of this movie bears a humorously cutting physical resemblance not only to the real Welles but to one David Fincher. And yet the script for Mank which was originally written by Jack Fincher the directors father makes it easier in so many ways to imagine that Fincher sees himself as more of a Mank. Heroically flawed sure but heroic with his back against the wall and the studio system serving as the firing squad. If its the movies intention to undermine Welles role in the writing of his most timeless movie  a movie which it cant be forgotten laid the thematic groundwork for Finchers own Social Network  it doesnt quite succeed in that intention. Im not convinced that it is one. What Mank does more purposefully and with greater vigor is redirect our attention to the problem of movies writ large and what they do and how they can be used. Its the way that Fincher gets at this problem through knowing but plausible historical fiction movienerd fanfic that ultimately wins me over. And so does the irony of it all. Mank is what Fincher decided to make finally after his fathers script had languished in a drawer somewhere for years when Netflix asked if he had any dream projects up his sleeve. In its production and conception the film is intensely personal. For many this  and the usual Fincher promises of estimable and enormously controlled production surprising acting and perfect images  may be the most interesting indeed the only interesting thing about it. But the rest of us are in for a wild ride and an unexpected treat. In this article	David Fincher	Gary Oldman	Netflix	TV  Movies	TV  Movies ReviewsMore News 								Regina King Channels Political Trailblazer in Netflixs Shirley Trailer						Shirley Trailer						By 	Kalia Richardson 								True Detective Night Country Just Gave the Series Its Best Finale Ever						POSTMORTEM						By 	Alan Sepinwall 								Kristen Stewart Really Happy With Rolling Stone Cover Shoot Amid Controversy						i loved the opportunity						By 	Daniel Kreps 								George Santos Sues Jimmy Kimmel Alleging Fraud Over Using Cameo Videos						Cameo Video Suit						By 	Althea Legaspi 								Einstein and the Bomb Hits What Oppenheimer Left Out						Review							By 	Chris Vognar 	Read more				The Latest										Trump Ranks Dead Last Again in Poll of Presidential Greatness						Popularity Contest	20 mins ago									Alabama Court Says IVF Embryos Are Extrauterine Children  And People Under The Law						Troubling	2 hours ago									John Oliver to Clarence Thomas Drive Away from SCOTUS in a New 2.4 Million Motorcoach						Somehow Legal	4 hours ago									Regina King Channels Political Trailblazer in Netflixs Shirley Trailer						Shirley Trailer	5 hours ago										The digital daily newsletter			A Cultural Force ThatTranscends Generations Enter your Email		Subscribe			By providing your information you agree to our Terms of Use and our Privacy Policy.				We use vendors that may also process your information to help provide our services.	 Go to PMC.com			Most Popular											Oscar Predictions Oppenheimer Continues to Dominate After Christopher Nolans DGA Victory With BAFTA Awards Next												The Fantastic Four Cast Revealed for Marvel Movie												Kate Middleton Has Reportedly Seen a Side of Prince William Shes Never Encountered Amid Her Recovery												Frankie Beverly Announces Farewell Tour						You might also like											Creator Jos Junior Under Pressures Julio Andrade Unpack ActivistInspired Globoplay Original Living On A Razors Edge				5 hours ago										Stephen Jones Tale of TwoCities				24 mins ago										This 2in1 Treadmill Is More Than 100 off on Amazon Today And Folds Under Your Bed				2 weeks ago										Wonka Achieves Rare 1 ThreePeat on VOD as It Holds Off The Iron Claw				4 hours ago										Rangers OT Win Caps Memorable MetLife Stadium OutdoorWeekend				14 hours ago	Rolling Stone	Music	Politics	TV  Movies	SubCulture	Staff	Contact	Advertise	ShopLegal	Privacy Policy	Terms of Use	AdChoices	PMC Entertainment	California Privacy Rights	Your Privacy Choices	EU Privacy Preferences	Accessibility									Follow Us				facebook		twitter		youtube		instagram		tiktok										Newsletter Signup			Enter Your Email		Subscribe			By providing your information you agree to our Terms of Use and our Privacy Policy.				We use vendors that may also process your information to help provide our services.										Got a Hot News Tip			We want to hear it. Send us a tip using our anonymous form.		Send Us a Tip	Rolling Stone is a part of Penske Media Corporation.  2024 Rolling Stone LLC. All rights reserved.	Powered by WordPress.com VIPOur Sites	Artnews	BGR	Billboard	Deadline	Fairchild Media	Footwear News	Gold Derby	IndieWire	Robb Report	Rolling Stone	SheKnows	She Media	Soaps	Sourcing Journal	Sportico	Spy	StyleCaster	The Hollywood Reporter	TVLine	Variety	Vibe	WWD	Log In	Welcome	Get Digital Access	Manage Digital Account	Manage Print Account	Sign Out	Music	News	Features	Lists	Album Reviews	Live Reviews	Artists You Need To Know	Songs You Need To Know	RS Country	RS Latin	Politics	News	Features	Lists	Shop	TV  Movies	News	Features	Lists	Recaps	Reviews	Video  Photos	Photos	Videos	The Cover	Musicians on Musicians	SubCulture	News	Features	Lists	Creators	RS Recommends	Reviews	RS Essentials	RS Audio Awards	Gift Guides	Culture CouncilSubscription Icon		Follow Us	facebookrstwitteryoutubeinstagramtiktok		Alerts  Newsletters	Email Address		Sign Up			By providing your information you agree to our Terms of Use and our Privacy Policy.				We use vendors that may also process your information to help provide our services.	adCloseTry AgainVerify its you				To help keep your account secure please login again.			DismissLogInPlease log in				You are no longer onsite at your organization. Please log in.								For assistance contact your corporate administrator.								Dismiss										LogIn					 