David Finchers Misdirections The Movies Inside His Movies   SearchSearchSearchMenuSearchFeaturesThe TriangleThe Hollywood ProspectusContributorsPodcastsVideoQuarterlyESPN.comDavid Finchers Misdirections The Movies Inside His MoviesBen BuysseMoviesOctober 3 2014by Sean Fennessey and Chris Ryan FacebookTwitterPrintInside every David Fincher work there are dozens of little dalliances  illicit affairs taking place just out of plain sight. The elevator pitches are tight  aging backward founding Facebook Zodiac killer Swedish banking crime seven deadly sins dont talk about Fight Club  and most of them will leave you wanting to jump right back down that elevator shaft. But look closely and you will find the wonderful movements that make up Finchers various filmmaking symphonies  the buddy comedy insideZodiac the musical insideThe Curious Case of Benjamin Button the campus comedy insideThe Social Network the slapstick farce insidePanic Room.This all began after Fight Club his scathing satire marketed as a bro bible. Or maybe it was a bro bible marketed as a satire. Maybe it started because Fincher never wanted his audiences to be confused again but also didnt want to sacrifice the little joys of filmmaking. So he began hiding those joys.Fincher is renowned for his sumptuous compositions his superhuman eye for detail and his reputation for putting actors through endless rigorous takes to strip them of earnestness and capture exactly the performance he seeks hisfilms can at first glance seem almost didactic joyless and severe. This is after all the man who sees Star Wars as the story of two slaves.Fincher has a reputation for being uncompromising. He doesnt sound  fun. Josh Brolin talks about working with Paul Thomas Anderson as being absolute fucking chaos Quentin Tarantino writes tailormade parts for his loyal company of actors and leads them in cheers on the set Steven Soderbergh a longtime Fincher pal awakens the DIY spirit in his colleagues by working fast cheap and in control. But Fincher Fincher will break you.Heres the problem with that narrative It shortsells just how playful he can be.With the release of his 10th feature Gone Girl we look at the ideas hidden inside the work David Fincher has made since the turn of the millennium.The Slapstick Farce InsidePanic RoomIn the aftermath of Finchers twin triumphs Se7en and Fight Club Panic Room is like a riddle that a troll living under a bridge might ask you Where is it safe but dangerous full of love and surrounded by hate confined but allseeing In Jodie Fosters thiefproof steel cage where this veiled feminist barn burner plays is where. Think of the boxes men put women in the way men simultaneously shield women from and threaten them with violence  thats one way to look at this movie. Theres all kinds of weightiness to be drawn out of David Koepps script which is an elaborate Hitchcock update  all highconcept execution and thin characterization. But letting Fincher and his roving camera slink in and out of rooms around the bannisters of a stairwell up and down a service elevator makes for a technically miraculous achievement. And he has fun as his camera leers at a cell phone just out of reach under a bed or tracks a swirling whirlwind of paper blowing in the night wind. There are greater visual crescendos in his filmography but few accomplished in such confined space. Its a fun movie but rarely considered an important one. Minor Fincher.Panic Room arrived with a great anticipation it could never live up to but what it really signals is Finchers entreaty to the confines of the commercial. Finchers movies to this point were devilish entertainments but they were no doubt twisted. Koepp  who also wrote Jurassic Park and Mission Impossible  understands how to please audiences. Together they made something that is a half of their wholes. Panic Room is gripping grim and strange at times but it has a little pep in its perps. Theres nothing funny about home invasion kidnapping and murder so this thriller with Swisswatch plotting should not be the source of so much glee. And yet The SequenceFincher has taken great joy in destroying Jared Letos beautiful visage. Three years before Panic Room he had Fight Clubs Ed Norton turn Jordan Catalanos high cheekbones into decanned Alpo. For a period Fincher liked to make Leto  heretofore glassyeyed disaffected and impeccable  into a squirming bratty pissant. Here Leto plays Junior a rich crook out to rob his family of the inheritance they would otherwise split. Its Juniors plan to break into the new home of Meg Altman Foster where his deceased fathers fortune resides. Fincher immediately communicates that Junior is a twit. Big mouth cornrows and the What me whine of a fortunate son. He gets his comeuppance and in perfectly Three Stoogesian fashion.Watch how Leto modulates his performance all big eyes and exaggerated gestures.Its like a series of Mel Brooks sight gags shot by Michael Bay.Just as Leto overplays the comedy the drama ratchets up. Listen to the spare but booming score of this sequence. Its lifeordeath as Fosters character ignites the propane being funneled into the panic room. And thenLetos reaction after literally turning a blue streak is like Lou Costello meeting the Wolfman. Is Leto going too far This isnt a choice he made alone. Even David Fincher knows how funny it is watching Jared Leto burn. How many takes do you think this tookThe Buddy Comedy InsideZodiacThe cruelest image in Zodiac  and remember this is a movie where a long static shot captures a picnicking couple being stabbed while tied up  is the timelapse shot of San Franciscos Transamerica Pyramidbeing erected set to the sounds of Marvin Gayes Inner City Blues.Its actually a kind of cruel joke1 The world moves on buildings  monuments to mans ingenuity  go up even while everything around you falls apart. The world does not care whether you caught the man in black.Paramount was hoping for Se7en and Fincher came up with his newspaper movie. The studio more or less dumped it giving it no awards push After all these are the guys who were working Nacho Libre. Fincher which is a shame because its probably one of the five best films of the last 15 years. As a neonoir Zodiac has only Chinatown for competition. This is a movie about the destructive powers of obsession about needing to know the unknowable and the corrosive power of time. Instead of Grail Knights Fincher has detectives and journalists and he puts them on a quest that leads to nowhere.Its also a great buddycop movie.Zodiac is rightfully celebrated for its attention to period detail its recreation of the bureaucratic nightmare that is the modern criminal justice system and is notorious for the toll it took on its actors. The film was shot on digital with endless takes and little need to break in between. This prompted Robert Downey Jr. to leave jars of urine around the setas an act of protest. Stay strong brother. He would later say of Finchers working style I just decided aside from several times I wanted to garrote him that I was going to give him what he wanted. I think Im a perfect person to work for him because I understand gulags. Jake Gyllenhaal is still trying to put himself back together after playing codebreaking cartoonist Robert Graysmith.Whatever trials the cast went through to make the film must have bonded them together. Few Fincher movies are about people hitting it off  if anything vulnerability and connection are weaknesses in his universe. Just ask Morgan Freeman. Zodiac doesnt exactly have a warm gooey center. But it does understand friendship and how it can be both baptized and broken by labor. Maybe all that time in the gulag was worth it.The SequenceBy the time Downeys Paul Avery invites Graysmith to a local bar Mortis there have already been several grisly murders a couple of terrifying letters and a possible appearance by a serial killer on a televised callin show. I think everyone could use a drink.What follows is one of the more charismatic exchanges in Fincherland. The domineering Avery interrogating Graysmith Avery What do you do for funGraysmith I love to read. I enjoy books.Avery Those are the same things.This scene is basically shot in the dark and features two men both on the way to being shitfaced  one eventually doing bumps in a booth  talking about the cryptographic curiosities of a murderer. And its the brightest moment in the film  a portrait of connection of two like minds coming together despite their constitutional differences.There are two pairs in the center of Zodiac the San Francisco Chronicle duo of Graysmith and Avery and the police detectives Dave Toschi and Bill Armstrong played by Mark Ruffalo and Anthony Edwards. The former pair is an uneasy alliance forged by a night of drinking Aqua Velvas  and bonded through a shared obsession with discovering the Zodiacs identity. The latter are friends the way only people who spend most of their waking hours together working can be They are more like a married couple finishing one anothers sentences and providing muchneeded boxes of animal crackers when necessary.Of course everything ends and thats how you find yourself on a houseboat that doubles as a gin mill and triples as a pharmacy. Avery winds up on just such a boat  and Armstrong leaves Toschi opting to see his kids grow up rather than chase shadows. I suppose the tragedy at the heart of Zodiac is that all of this work went in and they never caught the real killer. But what happened to those who chased that killer and their friendships always seemed far sadder.The Technicolor Musical InsideThe Curious Case of Benjamin ButtonThe odd duck. Thats the best way to describe Finchers elongation of the F. Scott Fitzgerald story about a man who ages backward. It is a long languorous ultimately soporific lunge for grace. It has no urgency no verve no edge. But for all of this movies problems  and they are myriad from Brad Pitts casting to the dubious resemblance the script bears to Forrest Gump2  there are still traces of fun.Against the washedout taupe beige and coffeecolored palette that Fincher uses to animate 1920s Louisiana he splashes accents. Theyre little grace notes indications of a heart beating inside a corpse. Look at thisFincher zeroes in on Pitts entrancing blue irises drapes Taraji P. Henson in a garish pink coat and fetishizes Cate Blanchetts luminous imperial red hair. He looks hard for the little lights. Theyre like desperate acts of rebellion in an otherwise conforming exercise. The movie says Ill take that Oscar but these rogue shades say Sex desire weirdness  goddamnit let me out of this prestigemovie coffinThe SequenceIn the movies most elegant sequence a reunited Benjamin and Daisy Blanchett find themselves in a courtyard at dusk. And for a brief spell lust takes over. Daisy a dancer seduces Benjamin with a series of balletic movements her body a pencil and then a compass limbs lifting up and down.It lasts only two minutes and when it does end Daisy goes in for the kill. If this were a Vincente Minnelli musical from the 1950s like The Band Wagon or Brigadoon its at this moment a frantic jazz number would break out and Pitt would begin singing some veiled sexual innuendo about feeling fresh. Fincher  the man who taught Madonna to vogue who went straight up with Paula Abdul who let Christy Turlington vamp  inched right up to the face of his first fullblown musical. And then he pulled back.The Campus Comedy InsideThe Social NetworkLife moves pretty fast in this movie and if you dont stop and look around once in a while you could miss something. The Social Network is told by unreliable narrators speaking at a series of overlapping lawsuit depositions in the dense languages of legalese and tech jargon. The villain of the story is played at one point or another by almost all of its heroes and midway through the film the role of protagonist actually switches from Jesse Eisenbergs Mark Zuckerberg to Andrew Garfields Eduardo Saverin. Its no longer a story about the defendant its a story about the plaintiff.In retrospect all this sleight of hand was probably confusing for viewers. Fincher didnt provide a users manual and that left the film up to a variety of interpretations. The Social Network was criticized upon its release for the creative liberties it took in its rendering of recent history. Much of this criticism was laid at the feet ofAaron Sorkin who penned the semiautomatic dialogue. Sorkin would go on to straight up treat history like a prop with The Newsroom so its no surprise he allegedly played fast and loose with some characterizations placing a disproportionate amount of importance on power old money tradition and the anxiety of acceptance. Sorkins fictional Harvard features moments possibly fashioned out of whole cloth painting what some have described as an inaccurate and unfair portrait of Zuckerberg and his motivations. To say nothing of his girlfriends.For instance this scene apparently did not happenSo let me ask you a question Do you care whether Bob Woodward really asked Carl Bernstein if there was anywhere he didnt smoke Would you rather live in the world where The Social Network was a letterperfect piece of documentary history or the one where you get to see Andrew Garfield tell Jesse Eisenberg to Lawyer up assholeFour years later this is a nobrainer and the movie is still the most purely entertaining one Fincher has ever made. Theres an understandable urge to make popular culture answer for all sorts of crimes and misdemeanors and to want the artifacts of our culture to mean something more than simply what they are. Certainly we are all little Daniel Kaffees staring at the screen begging for the truth. But sometimes Jaws is just about a shark. That should be enough. Welltold stories are a wonder and The Social Network is one of the besttold of the decade.Part of whats wonderful about the film is its energy. This feels like Finchers youngest film. He didnt just catch a cast on its way up he was the trampoline that bounced them into the constellation. If you were a young actor in The Social Network youd almost be pissed off. What are the chances you are ever going to be in a movie as good as this againThe young ones are crucial here though. The Social Network has been described as a story about ambition greed and the Information Age. Thats not cool. You know whats cool COLLLLLLLEGE.The SequenceWhen Mark Zuckerberg pitches the idea for The Facebook to Eduardo Saverin in the freezing Cambridge cold outside of a Jewish fraternitys Jamaicanthemed party he says What if we took the entire social experience of college and put it onlineIn the spirit of people stealing ideas Fincher goes ahead and takes a fivefinger discount on this one He puts the entire social experience of college into a sevenminute film sequence.A little less than 10 minutes into the film the newly single slightly buzzed Zuckerberg gets an idea from a drunk friend in his dorm room and lets the hacking begin. Just like that the world was going up on a Tuesday.You probably didnt go to Harvard and wherever you did wind up going to school probably wasnt lit by Fincher and Jeff Cronenweth so it didnt look like you were living inside J.M.W. Turners Fishermen at Sea. But you probably did have nights like the one in which Zuckerberg and his few friends hacked the Harvard network and came up with the germ of the idea that would eventually become Facebook. Of course you came up with a toxic pizza topping combo those dudes changed the world.The Atticus Ross and Trent Reznor composition that scores the sequence is called In Motion and thats the thing to keep in mind Something is always moving in this scene  if its not Finchers camera its Zuckerbergs fingers the clock or the cursor on his computer screen as he simultaneously blogs and codes. This is college  simultaneously sedentary and thrilling.Meanwhile in a different part of town on a different planet this is happeningThis sequence is shot scored and performed like a heist. But watch the various kids  Dustin and Billy making screwdrivers the stoned dude on the couch watching Shark Week the students in the lab Erica Albrights roommate in her flannel pajamas the kids in the pizza parlor all while beautiful people on E dance to Seratosynced songs.Watch the subtle ways in which Saverin and Zuckerberg interact. Not yet business partners not yet courtroom opponents  just two guys with a very specific dynamic.This is Finchers campus tale  somewhere in here is his version of Lucky Jim or a David Lodge novel  set inside his American dream story. Outsiders looking in through a computer screen. We as viewers in turn looking in on the outsiders through their windows. And whats that written on one of themAbout those windows. Whether you went to Harvard or Temple or lived on an organic farming collective your late teens and early twenties are a time of dislocation alienation and scattered moments of ecstasy and occasionally Ecstasy. Which is weird because its also a time when you are living all over other people. Fincher gets at the highdensity alienation that comes along with college  all the lonely people where do they all belong Dorms probably. Who can say whether the footage of the bacchanalian finalclub party isnt the collective fever dream of all the kids in hooded sweatshirts shut out of the imagined gathering they didnt get invited toThe essence of the films take on Facebook is right here This was a way to see through those windows over those walls to create your own finalclub. But to show this Fincher had to ever so briefly seven minutes show the loneliness and the fun these guys were trying to conquer and recreate respectively.The MayDecember Love Story InsideThe Girl With the Dragon TattooI think people are perverts Fincher says in a bonus featurette called Men Who Hate Women on theGirl With the Dragon Tattoo Bluray. Then he smiles devilishly. Ive maintained that. Thats the foundation of my career.Heres the thing Fincher. Is. Lying. Heres how we know His adaptation of Stieg Larssons The Girl With the Dragon Tattoo the Swedish gothnoir thriller that burned up Hudson Booksellers across the globe is a sweet almost saccharine love story. Forget about the rape the rape revenge the torture chamber the international gunrunning scandal the tattoos the incest and the bonecold Swedish winter. This is a heartwarming story about a weathered older man becoming reenergized by an exciting young woman who is smarter and craftier than he. Its no wonder the press tour for Dragon Tattoo became one long pantomime about weathered 49yearold Fincher and his young muse Rooney Mara  with whom hed bonded on The Social Network  and the prospects of a potential affair. Consider this fawning cryptic exchange between the two that opens an Interview magazine conversation.Fincher So my understanding is that there was an altercation at a wedding with an enthusiastic possibly inebriated mid20s male who without your consent decided to lift you into the air.Mara Yes.Fincher And then dance with you as if you were some kind of toy.Mara Yes.Fincher And you responded by grasping his larynx  with extreme prejudice.Mara I very calmly advised him that I could Fincher Do bodily harm.Mara Yes that I could do serious bodily harm and that he should probably put me down.Fincher I cant tell you how happy that makes me.Mara Why I dont know if it was so much a Lisbeth Salander moment.Fincher No what I like is that it was a Rooney Mara moment.Is this moviestar mythmaking or outandout flirting It hardly matters. Lisbeth Salander the ghoulchic heroine of Dragon Tattoo is an intriguingly obvious idea of sensuality for Fincher who examines her in repose throughout the movie. She is lithe and dark her skin a pallid gray. She looks like one of his neatly appointed sets soundtracked by Suicidal Tendencies. Her partner and paramour the disgraced journalist turned detective Mikael Blomkvist is a wounded great man driven to solitude and the whims of a wealthy family. They are an unlikely pair but they meet at the perfect time.Dragon Tattoo has a bad reputation or none at all but revisiting it reveals a shocking ingenuity and a bittersweet point of view Life sucks buy a motorcycle. And before the sequelanticipating ending3 Fincher puts us through the paces of blossoming love with romcom efficacy. There isnt one distinct sequence that takes us inside the Spencer TracyandKatharine Hepburnstyle romantic negotiation happening here. Instead we get all the beats.The MeetCuteThe Older Man ReminiscesThe Witty ReparteeThe ConsummationThe Morning AfterThe Revenge on the Maniacal Serial Killer Hiding Under Their Noses the Whole TimeThe ConfessionThe Reluctant FarewellAt its conclusion it all feels a bit like Brief Encounter a love felt deeply and then retired. By the time of Dragon Tattoo Fincher had been everywhere Hed been a box office king a commercial artiste an awardsmonger and a puzzledover technician. But hed never been a lover. In fact aside from the more traditionally gooey and unearned loveacrosstheages in Benjamin Button the last significant romance in his films consisted of the psychosexual encounters of Marla Singer and Tyler Durden. And we know the tenor of that coupling. So look at Dragon Tattoo again. Its love minus zero no limits.And Now a Word From Our SponsorsIts cool how one of the most accomplished feature film directors of the last 20 years is also one of the most influential commercial and music video auteurs of all time. Always nice to have a plan B. Over the last few years Finchers output in these fields has slowed but he still finds time for them now and then. In 2013 he shot the video for Justin Timberlakes Suit and Tie and just recently four new Gap commercials of his hit the airwaves.This is not a oneforme oneforthem situation. Fincher clearly likes making commercials. You can imagine the pride in his voice when he talks about the way he shot the advertising campaign for his Netflix series House of Cards. He seems to take it as seriously as directing the first two episodes of the first season. Maybe the its just business nature of television advertising and music videos appeals to Finchers cynical worldview. And after all nobody said these acts of commercial creativity werent creative.The SequenceLets not get into the semiotics of normcore clothing commercials or J.T.s dance moves. This is just a note to say that for a guy capable of making colors look claustrophobic Fincher makes blackandwhite look just like heaven.Maybe he sees it as an escape. Hes obsessed with movies  perhaps blackandwhite represents some kind of dream world. Or maybe money just feels good.This article initially misidentified the Transamerica Pyramid as the Prudential Building.FincherAlso penned by Buttons screenwriter Eric Roth.Said sequel is likely not coming at least not from Fincher. Filed Under Movies David Fincher Aaron Sorkin gone girl The Girl With The Dragon Tattoo The Social Network The Curious Case of Benjamin Button Rooney Mara director Panic Room Jodie Foster Zodiac Jake Gyllenhaal David KoeppMore MoviesMore Hollywood ProspectusMore from We Went There ClippersMavs and DeAndre Jordan Night in Los Angeles  October 30 2015NBA Overnight Where Was the Spark  October 30 2015Jalen and Jacoby Discussing DeMarcus Cousins the Thunder and More  October 30 2015Happy Halloween The Best HorrorMovie Monsters  October 29 2015The Tao of Dabo How to Appreciate Clemsons Coach  October 29 2015See all from More MoviesBrand Echh Sandra Bullock and Billy Bob Thornton Cant Save the Lame Our Brand Is Crisis  October 30 2015Happy Halloween The Best HorrorMovie Monsters  October 29 2015An Obsessive Ridiculous 6 Trailer Deconstruction  October 28 2015Ash vs. Bruce Campbell The B Movie Legend Returns to The Evil Dead  October 28 2015Weekend Box Office Winners  Losers Bill Murray Vin Diesel Steve Jobs and Jem All Go Down in Spectacular Flames  October 26 2015See all MoviesMore Hollywood ProspectusBrand Echh Sandra Bullock and Billy Bob Thornton Cant Save the Lame Our Brand Is Crisis  October 30 201550 Scenes That Do Not Appear in the Fox XFiles Revival  October 30 2015In Praise of Beach Slang 2015s Best Most Sincere Rock Band  October 29 2015Who Was Missing From Taylor Swifts Miami Squad  October 29 2015Happy Halloween The Best HorrorMovie Monsters  October 29 2015See all Hollywood ProspectusPrevious StoryGrantland Reality TV Fantasy League Just the Most Important Things From Your Special Shows This WeekNext StorySongs of the Week Rich Gang E40 the Empty Hearts and MoreThe And Greenwald Podcast  Aya CashOctober 28 2015The Andy Greenwald Podcast  Fargo Showrunner Noah HawleyOctober 27 2015Grantland Pop Culture  Aaron SorkinOctober 23 2015TwitterFacebook FeaturesThe TriangleThe Hollywood ProspectusContributorsPodcastsVideoQuarterlyESPN.com Terms of Use and Privacy Policy and Safety InformationYour California Privacy RightsChildrens Online Privacy Policy are applicable to you. 2018 ESPN Internet Ventures. All rights reserved. InterestBased Ads. Cookie Policy.Powered by WordPress.com VIPPost toCancel  