 David Fincher  Great Director profile  Senses of Cinema  SearchSubscribeSubscribe to Senses of Cinema to receive news of our latest cinema journal.Enter your email address belowSubmit FeaturesRecent My Filthy Dirty Lust Sex Agency and Nymphomaniac Lars von Trier 2013Amy Simmons  September 2016  Issue 80 Cinema and Poetry T. S. Eliots Murder in the CathedralWheeler Winston Dixon  September 2016  Issue 80 Imagining a Nation Ali Mostafa about the Emergence of Emirati CinemaAlfio Leotta  September 2016  Issue 80 More publicity means more protection An interview with documentary director Sonia KennebeckChuleenan Svetvilas  September 2016  Issue 80more articles...Random Making a FilmSean Lindsay  March 2014  Feature Articles  Issue 70Festival ReportsRecent Retrieving the Cinemas Past Il Cinema Ritrovato XXXth EditionPeter Hourigan  September 2016  Issue 80 What Is It The 27th FID Festival International de Cinma MarseilleJames Lattimer  September 2016  Issue 80 International Cinema Nationalist Politics The 17th 2016 Jeonju International Film FestivalMarc Raymond  September 2016  Issue 80 Bold Origins Unfolding Futures The Second Annual Queensland Film FestivalAlison Taylor  September 2016  Issue 80more articles...Random Last Years Revolutions The 51st Thessaloniki International Film FestivalSean Lindsay  March 2011  Festival Reports  Issue 58Book ReviewsRecent Dead Far From It The End of Cinema A Medium in Crisis in the Digital Age by Andr Gaudreault and Philippe MarionKate Balsley  September 2016  Issue 80 What is New about New Europe in Contemporary European Cinema East West and Centre. Reframing Post1989 European Cinema by Michael Gott and Todd Herzog eds.Lukas Brasiskis  September 2016  Issue 80 No Appeasement JeanMarie Straub and Danile Huillet Writings by Sally Shafto ed. and JeanMarie Straub  Danile Huillet by Ted Fendt ed.Daniel Fairfax  September 2016  Issue 80 Francomania Exposed Murderous Passions The Delirious Cinema of Jess Franco by Stephen ThrowerWhitney Strub  September 2016  Issue 80more articles...Random Stan Brakhage Filmmaker edited by David E. JamesSean Lindsay  July 2006  Book Reviews  Issue 40CTEQRecent Pearls of the Deep or Five Masterly Apprentices Guides to Bohumil Hrabals Gift of the GabCerise Howard  September 2016  Issue 80 The Vanguard of Marketa LazarovJohn Edmond  September 2016  Issue 80 RatcatcherCarlota Larrea  September 2016  Issue 80 Morvern Callar A Girl AbroadKristy Matheson  September 2016  Issue 80more articles...Random Remembering the Future LHerbier and LInhumaineSean Lindsay  September 2015  Cinmathque Annotations on Film  Issue 76Great DirectorsRecent Alan RudolphSteven Rybin  August 2016  Issue 80 Albert BrooksChristian Long  August 2016  Issue 80 Robert Downey SrWheeler Winston Dixon  July 2016  Issue 79 Masaki KobayashiAndrea Grunert  July 2016  Issue 79more articles...Random Louise KolmFleckSean Lindsay  October 2004  Great Directors  Issue 33DonateSubscribeAbout Senses of CinemaContact UsStaffStyle GuidePast IssuesSpecial DossiersAdvertisersProposalsResearch linksFeaturesFestival ReportsBook ReviewsCTEQGreat DirectorsSpecial DossiersPast IssuesDonateSubscribe  HomeGreat DirectorsDavid FincherSean Lindsay  July 2003  Great Directors  Issue 27b. 1962 Denver Colorado USAfilmographybibliographyweb resourcesIt is an understatement to claim that the films of director David Fincher are reminiscent of classical film noir. The canonical texts written on the subject notably Raymond Borde and tienne Chaumetons Towards a Definition of Film Noir 1955 and Paul Schraders Notes on Film Noir 1972 read like how to guides for understanding films like Alien 3 Seven Fight Club and to a lesser extent The Game and Panic Room. Schrader points out that film noirs techniques emphasize loss nostalgia lack of clear priorities insecurity then submerge these self doubts in mannerism and style. In such a world style becomes paramount it is all that separates one from meaninglessness. 1 If this is true Fincher has created a series of films that are anything but meaningless. His slick and glossy treatment of a dark world frequently garners accusations that his films are shallow experiments in style. It is more accurate to say that Fincher absorbs the fleeting styles and tastes of Hollywood reflects them and twists them. He pulls back the curtain revealing a mechanical process at the core of the filmmakers art leaving us to wonder how we lost our humanity in something we love so much.Perhaps the most disturbing thing about Fincher is his proven ability to buy artistry at 7000 a second. The idea that a film can cost 50 millionplus inspires nausea in most critics and it is tempting to bury our heads in the sand and pretend that all that cash doesnt really make a film any better. But while many directors with fat studio wallets are falling over themselves to get the biggest bang for their bucks Fincher is lacing his films with effects that are subdued moody and often transparent. He is mapping out impossible camera movements with CGI commissioning intricate sets that would make Dario Argento drool tweaking every last detail in postproduction and reshooting copious amounts of footage after the principal photography has wrapped. He appears to have the studios figured out and is able to make films the way he wants with or without the final cut.Fincher cultivated a healthy respect for bigbudget filmmaking as a teenager when he landed a dream job at Industrial Light and Magic. He worked on special effects cinematography for films like Return of the Jedi 1983 and Indiana Jones and the Temple of Doom 1984. As if this experience didnt already place him at the chewy centre of his generations pop culture he then went on to direct music videos for among others Madonna Michael Jackson and the Rolling Stones. Fincher also found a place directing lavish commercials for corporations like Nike Levis Pepsi and CocaCola this profession has since sheltered Fincher from the whims of the studios giving him time to choose his projects and negotiate a decent amount of control over them. It has also provided those who disapprove of Finchers films with a convenient justification. There are dissenters who simply object to all films of quality and Finchers work with commercials and music videos leads him to produce films with extremely precise lighting editing and dcor.Fincher proudly stands behind all of his work except Alien 3 and defends himself against his detractors. He says theres this assumption that commercials are just closeups of celebrities holding products up to their faces. But some of them are great art. Its not the art of the surrealistic painting or the poem but it is art. 2 Finchers definition is refreshingly inclusive. At the same time Fincher hints that the relative importance of a film is fleeting and indeterminateI think the movies I make are trifles. Theyre footnote movies. Im not making big important movies Im not making Bridge on the River Kwai. Im not dealing with big noble themes. But again I couldnt imagine somebody wanting to remake Psycho so maybe Im wrong. 3Maybe thats why he continues to make thrillers even though he believes that comedies are probably more important to the human psyche than movies that scare people. 4 Or maybe he aspires to exorcise our demons by showing them in their entirety. The unique combination of despair cynicism and the occasional burst of calculated sadism that pervade Finchers films has surfaced only on rare occasions in Hollywood cinema during the past 50 years and each time it leaves a scar.Finchers first feature film Alien 3 1992 was a critical and commercial failure. Wrought with agony under the iron fist of Twentieth Century Fox Finchers vision for the sequel was demolished by the studio. Fox was plainly unwilling to gamble on an even darker version of an already depressing film especially when handing over an unprecedented budget to a firsttime director. By the time the ordeal was over Fincher reportedly swore he would rather have colon cancer than direct another picture. 5 Finchers later film career may not have been so successful nor his fan base so large if Alien 3 had been a benign success. After all there is no better way to gain sympathy as a director than to have your dreams crushed by heartless studio executives. However greatness or even the possibility of greatness does not typically descend from sympathy. Alien 3 taught Fincher a valuable lesson. Keep your friends close but keep your enemies closer. New Line Cinema and Fox Studios executives put their careers on the line to give Fincher extra time and money to tinker with the endings of Seven and Fight Club.Alien 3 replays much of the content of Ridley Scotts original Alien 1979. The outgunned and unprepared humans unable to flee because they are adrift in space overcome the odds and destroy the creature that is hunting them. However the originality of Alienthe shock of a living man giving birth to the creature as it bursts from his chest the betrayal of the crew by its android companion and the strength of the female protagonist that ultimately casts the creature into spaceis intentionally absent. Imagine a stock horror film where the defenseless teenagers simply surrender to the serial killer at the outset. They do eventually destroy the creature but only because they have nothing better to do.The visual language of the film was carefully planned to nourish the paranoia and isolation of the films plot. The camera is always looking up at the smooth lines of the neogothic interiors but the angle only makes the film more claustrophobic because the camera never gets far enough away to make us feel comfortable with the surroundings. Even if we werent always so close to everything its unlikely it would make any difference. As the films cinematographer Alex Thompson pointed out Fincher was always saying Keep it dark keep it dark making it very difficult for him to maintain any sort of color in the image. 6 The end result is a gritty chiaroscuro sepia that doesnt let up.In the last few minutes of the film a curious attempt is made to resurrect an SF atmosphere. Men in white suits  la E.T. arrive after the destruction of the alien to take Ripley and her child away. They want to develop the alien life form into a weapon. Robin Woods comments on the end of Alfred Hitchcocks Shadow of a Doubt 1943 seem particularly relevant here when he says that the Hollywood ideology is shattered beyond convincing recuperation. 7 This sudden influx of guns and enemy soldiers is too little too late. As Ripley jumps to her death clutching the newborn alien to her chest Alien 3 is unable to find resolution in this or any other context. Since that moment fans have prayed nightly that a directors cut of Finchers original concept will be released. Fincher however would just as soon see the films original negatives destroyed.Fincher proved his aptitude for moody set pieces with his next film Seven 1995 a drama about two detectives who track a heavenbent serial killer who chooses his victims and their deaths according to the seven deadly sins. The film is viscerally repellent due to the viciousness of the killers crimesfor the first murder he feeds a man for days until his stomach burstsbut it is more horrific than gory. It comes as a surprise watching the film more closely in later viewings that so much of what we thought we saw the first time is never shown.Foster Hirsch has high praise for the setting of Seven because it may well be the most richly rendered symbolic space to date in the history of neonoir. 8 However he concludes that Seven is compelling if morally hollow. 9 I would instead argue that Seven floods us with morality not all of it palatable. The fragmentation of narrative voice is extensive and the only authoritative storyteller we can cling to Somerset played by Morgan Freeman is the one who believes that the violent aspects of human nature are incomprehensible yet unstoppable. Frighteningly enough even the killer John Doe Kevin Spacey has a powerful and convincing voice in the film. He at least envisions an end to violence.Seven conforms to the definition of the progressive text as one that challenges the conventional means of representing reality in the cinema in such a way as to expose those means as a practice as a product of ideology and not as a manifest replication of reality. 10 This label is easier to apply to Fight Club 1999 where the style of the film directly influences characters and the narrative structure but the seeds of this visual progression are planted in Seven. The films protagonists detectives Somerset and Mills Brad Pitt are from two different worlds and the lens alternates between their two disparate perspectives. Somersets world is smoky and dark his crime scenes are littered with grime and decay and his precinct cluttered and cramped is a monument to unsolved cases. Mills approaches police work as a profession rather than a solemn duty. He has the hot cups of coffee the beautiful home and a beautiful wife Gwyneth Paltrow. His first crime scene is bright and media saturated and his attitude is reflected in the words that echo from a nearby television this will be the very definition of swift justice.Fincher and cinematographer Darius Khondji Jeunet and Caros Delicatessen  and City of Lost Children  worked to create a new aesthetic that would successfully convey the mood of the characters without falling into kitsch and clich. Khondji comments that they moved toward a roughness a grittiness and didnt worry about making things beautiful. 11 Towards this end Khondji applied a new resilvering process to the negatives revealing more grain in the celluloid and making the black impervious to light.The noir world and the clinical world of the policeprocedural compete until gradually Somersets historically proven pessimism wins out. It is unclear at which point the killer takes control of the film. Possibly he has always had the upper hand and we have simply been following his directions. At any rate we are certain that his final ghastly actshipping the head of Mills wife by courier to this final destination in the middle of nowheresymbolizes nothing but victory for Does machinations. Mills executes Doe shooting him several times. The fall of an innocent man is complete but we cant forget Does venomous remarks that only in a world this shitty could his victims be considered innocent. In most Hollywood serialkiller films the death of the madman at the end seems to tie up all the loose ends. In Seven Does execution fulfils his master plan he claims that he is a victim of envy and completes the story that he set out to tell. Somersets voiceover as the film closes cannot regain the confidence of the spectator and is unable to mitigate the impact of the tragedy.Following Seven Fincher was selected to direct The Game 1997. In this clever thriller Michael Douglas plays Nicholas van Orton a man of inherited wealth and privilege who is haunted by his fathers suicide and is in the midst of more than a simple midlife crisis as his 40th birthday approachesthe day when in his own life his father chose to jump to his death. So when his brother Sean Penn the neer do well son offers him the chance to sign up for a game that will change his lifeto make it funhe is curious enough to accept. After visiting the offices of CRS the administrators of the game a conspiracy unfolds that threatens his status and his life. His home is vandalized he discovers his briefcase in a hotel room filled with alarming Polaroids and cocaine he is driven into the river by a taxi driver who is in on the action and after being told that his most valuable bank accounts have been emptied he is drugged and left for dead in Mexico. The rules of the game were never laid out so we are in the same boat as Nicholas wondering if this is real or just an elaborate hoax.The Game is an apt title the audience is playing its own game as Van Orton is playing his. We happily sign ourselves over to the events we see on screen and are drawn through the absurd sequence of events without a second thought gaily eating up the illusions of the movementimage. Fincher exploits the game that is inherent in the noir mystery as we try to figure out the twist the trick ending. All the while he proudly displays the tools of his machination. Van Orton is being manipulated by costumes sets props characters and soap opera tragedies. This should highlight the fact that we are manipulated by these same elements. We should know better than to go along with it. But just because we know that we are watching a film doesnt make us any less susceptible to the illusion. If anything knowing the rules makes us even more gullible. Hirsch evaluates The Game as a dire prediction for the future of film noirIt is however a perilous model that if pursued could lead only to the death of noir. Treating the form as only a game as carnivalesque theatre of the absurd a sequence of what in retrospect are vaudevillian turns the film contains the seeds of the genres destruction. 12When noir is simply something that we use to confirm the pleasantness of the reality that we live in something in the language is certainly failing its potential. This is not to say that it will always fail. Certainly Finchers next film Fight Club confirms that there is still some revolutionary potential in the noir mode.Fight Club is possibly the only film in which a happy ending is comprised of the literal selfdestruction of the protagonist and the possible end of civilization. In this world the American Dream is even further out of reach than it was in the noir world of the 1940s but rather than fighting to obtain it Fight Clubs solution is to destroy it utterly.As Tyler Durden Brad Pitt and the unnamed narrator Edward Norton stroll down the street at night they hit obvious status automobiles with baseball bats. And the assaults do not stop there. Every form of consumption suffers mass casualties the computers coffee shops and furniture that we trade in as frequently as we change our underwear are blown to pieces. Fight Club declares as ethos something that the classical noir protagonists discovered long ago the quest for the Maltese Falcon or the Great Whatzit even when it succeeds is a failure. Rather than simply accept that there is no such thing as a fair fight Fight Club reinvokes it as a revolutionary gesture. The fights are without glory or explicit reward but all of the participants are willing and in fact pleased to be part of a physical conflict.In Fight Club the American Dream that the narrator has followed all his life is an illusion the remnants of it hang in the form of faded or bleached flags over the attendees at testicular cancer meetings or in the command center of Project Mayhem. Such a situation some would argue could lead to a loss of ones identity. The narrators identity crisis and his insomnia lead him to narrate the entire film as a list of alternating tragedies and banalities. Two of the structuring principles of film noir the flashback and the voiceover reflect the narrators confusion cynicism and narcissism. The narrators reason for telling us this story is the same as his reason for attending the selfhelp groups. He tells Marla the ostensible femme fatale When people think youre dying they really really listen to you instead of. Instead of just waiting for their turn to speak she says finishing his sentence. The narrator finds in us a receptive audience.This is not to say that we entirely trust the narrator. His words are filled with contradictions and a very subjective morality. The narrators condemnation of Marla is immediately ridiculous. After all his problem with Marla is that she is a tourist in the same selfhelp groups that he is frequenting under false pretences her lie reflected my lie he says bitterly. The narrators obsession with Marla shadows conveniently his obsession with Tyler.Because of the narrators fascination with Tyler and because our narrator knows what Tyler knows Marlas role in the film is almost incidental. Tyler is very much the homme fatale whose charismatic demeanor manipulates the actions of the narrator. Male sexuality is now as dangerous as female sexuality and attractive men are set up to inspire and to receive the gaze of the camera and of other charactersthat sexually appraising gaze formerly reserved for the sexual woman only. 13 After all it is Brad Pitts halfnaked body that dominates the film. While Tyler and the narrator sit in the bathroomTyler in the bathtub and the narrator nursing his woundsthey discuss their failed relationships with their fathers and seriously question the need for a heterosexual relationship. Tyler says Were a generation of men raised by women. Im wondering if another woman is really what we need.Fight Club constantly exhibits the battle for the narrative voice even if it is not apparent until after the narrators revelation that he and Tyler are actually the same person. Karen Hollingers observations on the impact of the voiceover in film noir are pertinent in this context. She writesVoiceover creates this fragmenting effect by establishing within the film a fight for narrative power as the narrator struggles to gain control of the narrative events recounted. This battle between the narrator and the films flashback visuals leads to an extreme tension between word and image. 14Fight Club is told as a flashback with occasional footnotes. The narrator reminisces while Tyler shoves a gun in his mouth. The unnamed narrator speaks while Tyler periodically dips his hand in to dally with the visual images. Tylers subjectivity adopts a reflexive edge. He controls the very medium of the story. Frames of Tyler are spliced into the film that we are watching we later realize what these are when our narrator tells us of Tylers penchant for splicing single frames of pornography into childrens films and during his most impassioned speech the film jumps the sprockets of the projector. Realizing the inherent contradiction between Hollywood film as an escapist medium and noir language as a subversive mode Fincher calls on more radical techniques to get his point across.According to Gavin Smith Fight Club belongs to a distinct moment of both dread and rupture in American mainstream cinema. 15 His comments echo the words of those early critics who mapped out the territory of film noir. But times have changed. Fight Club is packaged to make us drool. After watching it we want to buy the theatre not burn it down. Maybe Tyler Durdens sermon to just let go is the ultimate solution but it will take more than a vicarious journey of selfdiscovery to make it happen.Finchers most recent film Panic Room 2002 is more conventional than any of his previous films. It is in the words of the films producer Scott Rudin a cheesy popcorn movie produced within an inch of its life. 16 It is a concept film a womantrappedinahouse film. I wont say too much about it other than to applaud Finchers attempt to make a perfect film and to critique it for being too simple to convincingly fill 90 minutes. The plot revolves around a home invasion robbery which finds Meg Altman Jodie Foster and her daughter Sarah Kristen Stewart trapped in the safe room of their New York brownstone townhouse. The three intruders of course want to steal something that is in the panic room. The film presents the battle to control this home space. It hinges on knowing what the enemy is up to. Surveillance is key. The camera glides through walls and floors down airshafts and through keyholes to create a clear geography of the home and its occupants. The suspense hangs on these effects and largely succeeds. But with the exception of how well the cast holds the film together theres nothing to it. There is no edge no question nothing left unsaid. Frankly Panic Room has all of us Fincher fans a little concerned. We dont go to sleep any easier these nights knowing that Lords of Dogtowna film about skateboarders in Venice California in the 1970sis slated to be Finchers next project. But I shouldnt speak too soon. Fincher is full of surprises.FilmographyThe Beat of the Live Drum 1985Alien 3 1992Seven 1995The Game 1997Fight Club 1999Panic Room 2002BibliographyRaymond Borde and tienne Chaumeton Towards a Definition of Film Noir in Alain Silver and James Ursini eds Film Noir Reader New York Limelight Editions 1996 Fifth ed. 1999 pp. 1726Foster Hirsch Detours and Lost Highways A Map of NeoNoir New York Limelight Editions 1999Karen Hollinger Film Noir Voiceover and the Femme Fatale in Alain Silver and James Ursini eds Film Noir Reader New York Limelight Editions 1996 Fifth ed. 1999 pp. 243260Barbara Klinger CinemaIdeologyCriticism Revisited The Progressive Genre in Barry Keith Grant ed Film Genre Reader Austin University of Texas Press 1986 pp. 7490Ron Magid Alien 3 In Space Theyre Still Screaming American Cinematographer 73 July 1992 pp. 5258Christopher Probst Playing for Keeps on The Game American Cinematographer 78 September 1997 pp. 3952Jonathan Romney The New Paranoia Games Pixels Play Film Comment November 1998 pp. 3943Paul Schrader Notes on Film Noir in Alain Silver and James Ursini eds Film Noir Reader New York Limelight Editions 1996 Fifth ed. 1999 pp. 5364Gavin Smith Inside Out Gavin Smith Goes OneonOne with David Fincher Film Comment 35 5 SeptemberOctober 1999 pp. 5868.Amy Taubin Invading Bodies Aliens 3 and the Trilogy Sight and Sound 2 3 March 1992 pp. 910David E. Williams The Sins of a Serial Killer American Cinematographer October 1995 pp. 3442Robin Wood Ideology Genre Auteur in Barry Keith Grant ed Film Genre Reader Austin University of Texas Press 1986 pp. 5973Web ResourcesDavidFincher.netA Fincher fan site with news and links to articles on the director and his films.Film Directors  Articles on the InternetLinks to online articles.A Fincher News SiteUp to date news on Finchers current work and DVD releases.TestosteramaA columninterview with the author screenwriter and Jack of Fight Club from Salon.com conducted by Michael Sragow.Salon.comDavid Thompsons ode to Jodie Foster written after the release of Panic RoomRotten Tomatoes archives of reviews ofAlien 3 Seven The Game Fight Club and Panic Room.God of FilmmakingDavid Fincher ranks as a Titan on Ambidextrous Pictures slightly odd Gods of Filmmaking websiteAlien 3Official Alien 3 siteSevenOfficial Seven siteFight ClubOfficial Fight Club sitePanic RoomOfficial Panic Room siteClick here to search for David Fincher DVDs videos and books at EndnotesPaul Schrader Notes on Film Noir in Alain Silver and James Ursini eds Film Noir Reader New York Limelight Editions 1996 Fifth ed. 1999 p. 58 Xan Brooks Directing is Masochism The Guardian April 24 2002  Ask David Fincher BBCi   Dan Epstein David FincherThe Roundtable Interview davidfincher.net  Brooks Ron Magid Alien 3 In Space Theyre Still Screaming American Cinematographer July 1992 p. 53 Robin Wood Ideology Genre Auteur in Barry Keith Grant ed. Film Genre Reader Austin University of Texas Press 1986 p. 68 Foster Hirsch Detours and Lost Highways A Map of NeoNoir New York Limelight Editions 1999 p. 281 Ibid. p. 282 Barbara Klinger CinemaIdeologyCriticism Revisited The Progressive Genre in Barry Keith Grant ed. Film Genre Reader Austin University of Texas Press 1986 p. 78 David Williams The Sins of a Serial Killer American Cinematographer October 1995 p. 39 Hirsch p. 229 Ibid. p. 201 Karen Hollinger Film Noir Voiceover and the Femme Fatale in Alain Silver and James Ursini eds Film Noir Reader New York Limelight Editions 1996 Fifth ed. 1999 p. 245 Gavin Smith Inside Out Gavin Smith Goes OneonOne with David Fincher Film Comment SeptemberOctober 1999 p. 60 Ask David Fincher  Share OnTweetThe Question Spielberg A Symposium Part One Position PapersThe Swine who Rewrote F. Scott Fitzgerald Joseph L. Mankiewicz as ProducerAbout The AuthorSean LindsaySean Lindsay recently completed an MA in Film Studies at Concordia University Montreal. He now lives in Calgary Alberta also known as the land that film forgot.Related Posts  Jonathan DemmeKeith Uhlich  October 2004  Issue 33  Frank BorzageJoe McElhaney  March 2003  Issue 25     Join Us   Founded in 1999 Senses of Cinema is one of the first online film journals of its kind and has set the standard for professional high quality filmrelated content on the Internet. Senses of Cinema 2016  Staff Members Editors  Michelle Carey Daniel Fairfax Dan Edwards Tim OFarrellAlexandra HellerNicholasWebmaster and Administrator  Rachel Brown Donate to Senses Click here to make a donation. If you are an Australian resident any donations over 2 are tax deductible.Search About Senses of CinemaContact UsPrivacyDonate now to support Senses of CinemaProposalsAdvertisersStaff    