David Fincher The Complex Mind of Social Networks AntiSocial Director  The Hollywood Reporter       			Skip to main content		Plus IconClick to expand the Mega MenuClick to expand search form	Got a tip The Hollywood Reporter homepage	Newsletters	Subscribe									The Definitive Voice of Entertainment News			Subscribe for full access to The Hollywood Reporter		See My Options	Sign Up		site categories		News	Film	TV	Awards	Lifestyle	Business	Global	Video	Music	Charts	ListsPlus IconClick to expand the Mega Menu		Menu	Click to expand search form The Hollywood Reporter homepage		Read Next									Box Office Bob Marley One Love Jams to Massive 52M Opening Madame Web Wipes Out at 26M						Subscribe									The Definitive Voice of Entertainment News			Subscribe for full access to The Hollywood Reporter		See My Options	Sign Up 	Home	News	General NewsDavid Fincher The Complex Mind of Social Networks AntiSocial DirectorThe new Hollywood Reporter magazine offers a rare profile of the antiauthoritarian rebel who shot Rooney Mara topless for a new Dragon Tattoo poster wanted to call Mark Zuckerberg Judas and doesnt play the Oscar game. You wont see me on Barbara Walters Oprah.							By 	Stephen GallowayPlus Icon								Stephen Galloway					More Stories by Stephen	The William Friedkin I Knew Feisty Opinionated and Exceptionally Open to Others	William Friedkin Acclaimed Director of The French Connection and The Exorcist Dies at 87	Jerry Springer Host of a Scandalous Talk Show Dies at 79	View All	February 2 2011 208pm	Share this article on FacebookShare this article on TwitterShare this article on FlipboardShare this article on EmailShow additional share optionsShare this article on LinkedinShare this article on PinitShare this article on RedditShare this article on TumblrShare this article on WhatsappShare this article on PrintShare this article on CommentHow antiauthoritative director David Fincher became one of Hollywoods most respected directors.FULL COVER STORY David Fincher The Complex Mind of Social Networks AntiSocial DirectorFrank W. Ockenfels 3Share this article on FacebookShare this article on TwitterShare this article on FlipboardShare this article on EmailShow additional share optionsShare this article on LinkedinShare this article on PinitShare this article on RedditShare this article on TumblrShare this article on WhatsappShare this article on PrintShare this article on CommentThe following article appears in the current issue of The Hollywood Reporter on newsstands Thursday.Im going to gut this placeDavid Fincher saunters through the fortresslike 11000squarefoot Hollywood studio he bought back in 2002 thats the closest thing he has to his own private fiefdom. Its as big as his talent as vast as his imagination  but its still not quite right. Maybe Ill rip down the walls and have everybody in one open space he declares. What do you think He smiles slyly tipping his goateed head to one side almost daring you to disagree. Its early morning on New Years Day and the directors latest film The Social Network is just embarking on a rollercoaster ride that will see it win the top critics awards then lose at the allimportant PGA DGA and SAG  mainly to rival The Kings Speech. But Fincher is in a mood to provoke.									Related Stories					Movies											Berlin All the Worlds A Kitchen in Rooney Mara Starrer La Cocina							Movies											La Cocina Review Rooney Mara in Explosive Account of Immigrant Restaurant Workers Chasing the American Dream					He points to a rifle placed strategically on a desk a reminder of the consequences he quips without stating for whom. Perhaps he means for the awards voters or for any studio executive who take him on  though right now few would dream of it.A year and a half since he agreed to turn the improbable story of a billionaire computer nerd into one of the most original pictures in years Fincher 48  a large authoritative man coolly commanding even in jeans and a black sweatshirt  has become a superstar flooded with offers for projects like his upcoming The Girl With the Dragon Tattoo. Its an odd twist for a director whos kept a skeptical distance from Hollywood most of his life and might have factored into his DGA loss.Alone on this rare day off except for an eager assistant who hurries to fetch us coffee he guides me through his studio past production rooms and sound booths and a tiny theater and into the art department where images abound from Dragon Tattoo the story of a bisexual hacker and the journalist she helps unravel a murder mystery.There are pictures of his heroines apartment the isolated house where some of the action takes place and a dungeon thats pivotal to the climax. Photos of various actors line the walls many in different shades of color which Fincher and his team used to explore ways to render the period when the photos would have been taken. Theres also an aerial view of the island at the heart of the story carefully charting each locales relationship to the others. Fincher has immersed himself in every detail of its geography just as he has Stieg Larssons bestseller on which the film is based. Hes a master of the meticulous  famous for his obsessive research and endless takes sometimes 50 or more per setup even so he shrugs At best you get 60 of what you want.Finally we reach his spare modern office centered on a wooden desk as imposing as Fincher himself. Warming up  as much as he ever allows himself  he takes out an iPad and clicks on a photo hes planning to use for the Dragonposter. It shows actor Daniel Craig halfhidden behind costar Rooney Mara whos looking directly into the camera. Her hair is spiky her face pierced with rings her body covered in tattoos. Its black and white and beautiful but theres no way in hell any studio will ever let Fincher use it as he knows.Because Mara is naked from the waist up.He is systematically antiauthoritarian says Bill Mechanic the former Fox chairman who greenlighted Finchers controversial 1999 drama Fight Club. He challenges authority challenges decisions. Fincher has been challenging them ever since growing up in Marin County Calif. ever since getting his big break making commercials at the ridiculous age of 21 ever since shooting his first film Alien 3 when he fought the studio so hard he got fired three times.Now he expresses just a modicum of regret. You dont want to see people cut off their noses to spite their face he says. But I probably did on my first movie because I foolishly thought being this squeaky wheel was the only way to be heard. Fincher fought bitterly to make Aliens 3his while the studio wanted it to be just another cog in its release schedule. The result was a work neither side liked.Fincher was 27 when he got the job and his career was flaring like a rocket but now it seemed poised to fizzle. The failure of Alien 3 made worse by inevitable comparisons to its Ridley Scott and James Cameron predecessors must have hurt more than he lets on. Critics panned it and the film made a disastrous 55.5 million domestically  quite a contrast to the success of Fincher videos such as Madonnas Express Yourselfand Aerosmiths Janies Got a Gun.He was very successful at a young age and had people try to take it away from him and he knows what that feels like his Social producer Scott Rudin says. But it still didnt make him toe the line. He has an anarchists mentality the producer adds. He likes to blow up systems.Even when those systems benefit Fincher himself. Time and again he refuses to do whats expected declining interviews even poking at the people who most support him. Ive been frustrated by what society wanted from me he acknowledges though hes hardly the confessional sort. I flip through catalogs and dont see anybody whos like me. Flip through a J.C. Penney catalog and you go None of these people hold any of my concerns. But arent they the very people who watch his movies He shrugs indifferent. The comfort zone he says is when they love and hate his work in equal measure. He recalls attending the premiere of Martin Scorseses 1982 release The King of Comedyand thinking This is fantastic  to take an audience to a place where they feel genuine discomfortWhere Finchers love of discomfort comes from is hard to gauge. The son of a Life magazine journalist and a mentalhealth nurse it was his father who introduced him to film. My dad loved movies he says. We used to drive into San Francisco and watch matinees. At age 7 he saw Butch Cassidy and the Sundance Kid.It was mindaltering. Theyre building fullscale trains and blowing them up. Theyre firing blanks at each other and riding on horseback and traveling to these locations  and theres Katharine Ross Who would want to do anything elseSix months later Finchers parents bought him a Super 8 camera and he started making his own films. It was liberating compared to his experiences at an alternative school where I was a disinterested student. I dont think I was trouble I just never bought into the idea that you are supposed to behave this way because somebody is wearing a badge. Life changed at 14 when Finchers family including his two sisters relocated to Ashland Ore. The teenager dreamed of returning to San Francisco and joining Industrial Light  Magic the company created by his former neighbor George Lucas.It was like Im getting further and further from the thing that I want to do he recalls thinking that if Lucas  whom he never knew well though they lived on the same street He was a very quiet guy  could make a career in the Bay Area so could he.After working as a local theater projectionist while at school  where he fell for films like Klute All the Presidents Menand Being There he volunteered at a TV station got a job with an animation company then at 19 joined ILM where he served as an assistant cameraman and matte photographer.His parents tolerated his refusal to go to college. But at ILM while he discovered how brilliant others could be he was also reminded that the establishment wasnt always right. I thought This is a bunch of guys in Wrangler jeans and plaid shirts who are scratching their asses and trying to figure this thing out  he notes. It was horrifying and liberating at the same time. I realized I had fallen for this idea because George Lucas has blessed these people with a place to blather around that they were somehow uberqualified. Really it was just a bunch of people trying to figure something out.NEXT PAGE FINCHER BREAKS INTO COMMERCIALS Three years later Fincher tried to figure out commercials. His first was one of his most memorable. A friend who was a truck driver and wanted to be a producer said Give me an idea for the American Cancer Society. So we sat down with some storyboard artists and said Lets do this thing thats the Star Child from 2001. Finchers ad showing a fetus smoking only made him 7000 but led to work on commercials and music videos first for Rick Springfield then after Fincher moved to Los Angeles for other artists.And yet Fincher was unhappy. I did videos that were progressively less and less expensive he complains. I ended up being signed by the musicvideo wing of a commercial production house and just didnt flourish and didnt have much fun. I got told by a lot of people that I was only good enough to play in the B or Cleagues I was never going to get the 1 million spots. His response I said F it lets start our own company. In 1986 with Steve Golin Sigurjon Sighvatsson and Dominic Sena Fincher founded the management advertising and production entity Propaganda Films making commercials and videos for the likes of Madonna Michael Jackson and Nine Inch Nails. Almost overnight their annual billings went from 2 million to 70 million. It was the beginning of the explosion of video directors becoming commercial directors Fincher recalls. It was also the beginning of commercial directors turning to features which crystallized for Fincher when he was given Alien 3.The directors runin with Fox was brutal. To this day he hates to talk about it. Asked whether he has disowned the film he says I never owned it and it has clearly soured him on studios  though he protests I like studios. I just dont like bureaucracies.They didnt like him either. Never the warm and fuzzy type one insider says Fincher was demanding. He is difficult with the marketing and distribution people especially one former colleague notes. But that comes out of not suffering fools.Asked about his manner  a certainty that can border on the cocky  Fincher hesitates. You know often times I think confidence can look like  it looks like different things to different people he says. But I dont think of myself as difficult. Were expected to do stuff thats awesome that means were going to have to push each other.Given this it might surprise Fincher that so many of his collaborators speak well of him. Producer Arnold Kopelson marvels at his knowledge of lenses of every setup. Hes an extraordinary filmmaker.Even Mechanic says Finchers reputation is exaggerated. There were lots of issues with the studio back and forth as always with David he notes of Fight Club. So I asked him to breakfast a few weeks before shooting and by the end of breakfast wed agreed on procedures and he stayed 100 true to his word. There wasnt anything at all contentious in the process. It was one of the best Ive ever had. By that time Fincher had redeemed himself with Seven1993 which in many ways defined his work dark visually audacious emotionally distant.I was the first person hired for the film Morgan Freeman recalls and I remember him talking to me about the process he wanted to use to make the film dark. I was intrigued. He controls where the camera is minutely where the actors are minutely where the lights are minutely. At the same time he is very collaborative.Fincher followed Seven with the Michael Douglas thriller The Game1997 then after Fight Club he moved on to the Jodie Foster starrer Panic Room2002 and Zodiac2007 an adaptation of Robert Graysmiths books about the Bay Area killer who was active when Fincher grew up.The film made only 33 million in North America but was one the bestreviewed pictures of the year. With it Fincher solidified his reputation as a supremely talented filmmaker if sometimes arrogant whose work was defined by its brilliance and also coldness.And so it came as a surprise to many Fincherfanatics yes theres a website of that very name when he took on The Curious Case of Benjamin Button2008 Eric Roths adaptation of F. Scott Fitzgeralds slender short story. What was a cool figure like Fincher doing on a warm love story like that I dont buy this notion that emotion and sentimentality are the same he argues. You wont see me on Barbara Walters Oprah thats not who I am. I dont like sentimentality because I dont like movies that tell me  I want to engage in a movie that says Here it is. Its not a colder point of view thats reductive. Its more adult.More adult than the films Fincher loved in his youth like Jawsand Star Wars I loved Luke Skywalker and I loved Darth Vader and I loved watching them work it out he reflects. But I also love Chinatown I love the fact that Jake Gittes Jack Nicholson is somebody that people had nothing but contempt for.Button earned 13 Academy Award nominations and raked in 127 million at the domestic box office. The film drew mixed reviews but reminded the industry that superstars like Brad Pitt  who also appeared in Seven and Fight Club  often delivered their best performance for Fincher. And yet its success was bittersweet not because the film won only three Oscars but because it left him utterly ineffably drained.It took six years to get that through the starting gate he sighs. It was just exhausting.NEXT PAGE FINCHERS SOCIAL NETWORKThe desire to avoid that exhaustion came into play with Social Network. Initially developed as a project for writer Aaron Sorkin to direct the screenplay was brought to Fincher by Rudin. I was given it on a Friday I read it on a Saturday and on Monday I was in a room with Sony Pictures cochairman Amy Pascal he recalls.After making sure Sorkin was willing to step aside I said I want to make the movie but I dont want to make it next spring. We have to be as close to ground zero with this phenomenon as we can. We have to be in Cambridge in the fall. Sony agreed. Following the usual back and forth  the studio wanted to make the film for 25 million Fincher insisted on 42 million  shooting began three months later. Unlike Zodiac where Fincher and Sony had parted ways over casting the studio accommodated the directors wishes.I said You gotta have 20 to 25yearold kids. You have to give me free rein to find the best people for these parts  he remembers. Now I said this on Zodiacand I got the list and its Russell Croweand Tom Cruise. This time Amy wanted me to meet people in the Sony fold. I said Lets cast it widely. They came back and said We get it. Go. Go meant allowing Fincher to shoot Sorkins 162page script uncut. After 68 days of filming in Boston and Los Angeles when Sony saw his rough edit  missing only the Henley regatta sequence that would later be filmed to fit Trent Reznors prewritten music  They didnt ask for any changes he says.The studios marketing executives were more resistant. We had the onesheet and we had to get that through Fincher notes. Key art designer Neil Kellerhouse came to us with one that had the tagline Punk prophet genius billionaire thief. It was fantastic but for about four months it was You cant do that Were not going to get involved in a lawsuit  Fincher smiles. I wanted Punk prophet genius billionaire Judas. Now hes back in the Sony saddle with Dragon Tattoo.Its two weeks after our first meeting and were in a tiny trailer at Paramount where Fincher is filming Dragonon six soundstages  even more than Button  and is huddled with his longtime companion and producer Cean Chaffin. An initial offer to visit the set has been scuttled at the last minute possibly because of Craigs reluctance to be spotted with Rachel Weisz though Fincher avoids the subject.Despite getting a huge budget and precisely the actors hes wanted Fincher seems frazzled dealing with an overheated studio where air conditioning has to pump in cold air to simulate the bitter Swedish winter  an ironic contrast to his Swedish shoot where the actors had to pretend the sun was baking while temperatures stooped to 40 degrees.Ive been shouting at everyone all morning Fincher grouses only halfjoking.Chaffin glances over concerned. Theyve worked together for 18 years and been a couple for 15 since Fincher split with his first wife following a brief marriage that left him with one daughter. Meeting Chaffin casts Fincher in a whole new light. Shes as warm and open as he can seem chilly and remote. Were oil and water he jokes. But in fact Chaffin reminds you of all the things its easy to overlook with Fincher His complete rejection of the Hollywood trappings his loyalty to those closest to him his strong bond with family his utter immersion in the work.Cean is very supportive of David Kopelson says. She makes it possible for him to be totally enmeshed in his life of making movies.Hell be enmeshed in Dragonquite a while longer. With a shoot that includes locations in Stockholm Zurich and England he still has 90 days of filming ahead. Its a giant project that Fincher initially avoided when his Buttonproducers Kathleen Kennedy and Frank Marshall broached it.I had just been through five years pushing a rock he explains. I sort of felt F I cant see anybody wanting to make a movie of this scale about a tattooed bisexual hacker in Stockholm. I cant go tapdancing again.He continued to resist even when Rudin obtained the rights. I was skeptical because the book is huge and there are so many characters he says. But what put it over the top was Sony chairman Michael Lynton and Amys insistence that they loved the idea of a franchise for adults. If you cant do a piece like this as a franchise theres no chance of ever doing one. Not that its been easy. First there was the issue of casting the lead Socials Mara. Then Fincher had trouble with his director of photography replacing him with Jeff Cronenweth. And finally came the reality of filming in Sweden. In the EU you cant shoot a 12hour day he explains.Between that the weather and the actors complicated schedules Fincher has had his hands full though hes thrilled with Mara. We got her an apartment in Stockholm and she kind of disappeared he says. She learned how to ride a motorcycle and got all of her piercings and tattoos. Also I asked her to learn how to skateboard because you need to stand like a 13yearold boy. I said I dont want you to stand like a girl. Insiders whove seen Steven Zaillians script say it focuses far more on her character Lisbeth Salander than the Swedish adaptation of the book. So Fincher desperately needs Mara to deliver  just as the studio needs him.There are degrees of wrong but ultimately Im responsible he says. Im either liberated or hamstrung by the material Im trying to make. But if Im hamstrung its my fing fault. He runs his hand through his hair thinking. Even with that rifle back in his studio should he ever need it there are limits to what he can do.Youre in charge but youre not in control the famously controlling director says. Anybody who thinks they are in control is nuts. FINCHERS GLOBAL BOXOFFICEThe Social Network 2010 213.6MThe Curious Case of Benjamin Button 2008 334MZodiac 2007 84.8MPanic Room 2002 196.4MFight Club 1999 100.9MThe Game 1997 109.4MSeven 1995 327.3MAlien 3 1992 159.8MWORLDWIDE TOTAL1.53BRead More About	Daniel Craig	David Fincher	Rooney Mara			THR Newsletters		Sign up for THR news straight to your inbox every day		Subscribe	Sign Up			More from The Hollywood Reporter				Heat Vision											After 70 Years EC Comics Returns from the Crypt in Oni Press Deal							Obituaries											Ben Lanzarone Pianist and Composer for Dynasty and Happy Days Dies at 85							international											BAFTA Awards Hannah Waddingham Performs Time After Time for In Memoriam Segment							Theater											Rita McKenzie Star of Ethel Mermans Broadway Dies at 76							Travis Kelce											Travis Kelce Donates 100K to Two Girls Shot at Kansas City Chiefs Parade							nba											Chris Brown Says He Was Uninvited From the NBA AllStar Game														Shopping With THR											The Best Presidents Day Sales on Dyson Vacuums Casper Mattresses Samsungs Frame TV and More							By Danielle DirectoMeston 								This Amazon Deal Gets You Two Bottles of Sunday Rileys Bestselling Serum for Almost the Price of One							By Tim Chan 								The Beloved Mighty Pimple Patches Are Down to Their Lowest Price Since Prime Day							By Tim Chan 								Apple AirPods Are Just 90 Right Now Saving You 30 Percent Off Online							By Danielle DirectoMeston Rudie Obias 			THR Newsletters		Sign up for THR news straight to your inbox every dayEmail Address		Subscribe Today	Sign Up		By providing your information you agree to our Terms of Use and our Privacy Policy.				We use vendors that may also process your information to help provide our services.  This site is protected by reCAPTCHA Enterprise and the Google Privacy Policy and Terms of Service apply.										Most Popular												Grammy Awards Winners List					By Kimberly Nordyke Carly Thomas 									Gina Carano Sues Disney Over Mandalorian Firing in Lawsuit Funded by Elon Musk					By Winston Cho 									Amazon Prime Video Ad Tier Sparks Class Action Lawsuit From Subscribers					By Winston Cho 									Donald Glover and Maya Erskine on RealLife Marriage Professional Divorce and When to Walk Away					By Lacey Rose 									Griselda Blanco Estate Settles Lawsuit With Netflix Over Sofia Vergara Show					By Carly Thomas 									Must Reads											True Detective Night Country Team Explains Ambiguous Ending You Should Be Making Theories							By Josh Wigler 								Is the Embattled Young Rust Armorer Getting a Fair Shot							By Rebecca Keegan 								Donald Glover and Maya Erskine on RealLife Marriage Professional Divorce and When to Walk Away							By Lacey Rose 								The Definitive Voice of Entertainment News					Subscribe for full access to The Hollywood Reporter		SEE MY OPTIONS	Sign Up   PMC Logo			Most Popular											Kate Middleton Has Reportedly Seen a Side of Prince William Shes Never Encountered Amid Her Recovery												Frankie Beverly Announces Farewell Tour												Spieth Seeks to Quash Subpoena in Under Armour Shoe Case												A Vast Gift of Calder Sculptures Could Change the Seattle Art Museumand the Surrounding CityForever						You may also like											This 2in1 Treadmill Is More Than 100 off on Amazon Today And Folds Under Your Bed				2 weeks ago										Car of the Week The Napier Samson L48 Was the First Car to Cross 100 MPH in America. This Recreation Could Fetch 1.1 Million.				16 mins ago										Ryan Destiny Raheem DeVaughn Sha Universe And More New RB That Appeal To YourSenses				3 days ago										Vanessa Williams to Play Miranda Priestly in The Devil Wears Prada Musical Scored by EltonJohn				8 hours ago	Subscriber Support	Get the Magazine	Customer Service	Back Issues	Eedition AccessThe Hollywood Reporter	About Us	Media Kit	Careers	Contact Us	AccessibilityLegal	Terms of Use	Privacy Policy	California Privacy Rights	Privacy Preferences	AdChoices	Your Privacy Choices									Follow Us			Icon LinkPlus Icon		facebook			Icon LinkPlus Icon		twitter			Icon LinkPlus Icon		instagram			Icon LinkPlus Icon		youtube												Newsletter Sign Up			Sign Up		Subscribe	Sign Up		By providing your information you agree to our Terms of Use and our Privacy Policy.				We use vendors that may also process your information to help provide our services.  This site is protected by reCAPTCHA Enterprise and the Google Privacy Policy and Terms of Service apply.										Have a Tip			Send us a tip using our anonymous form.		Send Us a Tip	Sign UpIcon LinkPlus Icon		The Hollywood Reporter is a part of Penske Media Corporation.  2024 The Hollywood Reporter LLC. All Rights Reserved. THE HOLLYWOOD REPORTER is a registered trademark of The Hollywood Reporter LLC.		Powered by WordPress.com VIPOur Sites	Artnews	BGR	Billboard	Deadline	Fairchild Media	Footwear News	Gold Derby	IndieWire	Robb Report	Rolling Stone	SheKnows	She Media	Soaps	Sourcing Journal	Sportico	Spy	StyleCaster	The Hollywood Reporter	TVLine	Variety	Vibe	WWDClose the menu The Hollywood Reporter homepage	NewsExpand news menu	Latest News	Labor	Culture  Politics	Tech  Digital	Music	LALocal	THR Investigates	Obituaries	FilmExpand film menu	News	Features	Reviews	Box Office	Heat Vision	TVExpand tv menu	News	Features	Reviews	Ratings	Live Feed	Heat Vision	The Fien Print	TVs Top 5 Podcast	AwardsExpand awards menu	News	Awards Chatter Podcast	Feinberg Forecast	Behind The Screen	The Race	THR Presents	Awards Season Hub	LifestyleExpand lifestyle menu	News	Style	Shopping	Arts	Real Estate	Rambling Reporter	BusinessExpand business menu	THR Esq	Creative Space	Features	Representation	News	ChartsExpand charts menu	More EssentialsExpand moreessentials menu	International News	Video	Music	Podcasts	Featured VoicesFollow UsFollow thr on facebookFollow thr on twitterFollow thr on instagramFollow thr on youtubeAlerts  NewslettersYour Email		Subscribe	Sign Up		By providing your information you agree to our Terms of Use and our Privacy Policy.				We use vendors that may also process your information to help provide our services.  This site is protected by reCAPTCHA Enterprise and the Google Privacy Policy and Terms of Service apply.			optional screen reader		About Us	Advertise	Careers	Contact UsIcon LinkPlus IconThe Hollywood Reporter is a part of Penske Media Corporation.  2024 The Hollywood Reporter LLC. All Rights Reserved. THE HOLLYWOOD REPORTER is a registered trademark of The Hollywood Reporter LLC.ad 