




















David Fincher: Into The Darkness | VashiVisuals Blog















































































































Please enable javascript to view this site.



 








 







HOME
FEATURED WORK
TEAM
CONTACT
SERVICES
BLOG
 
Select a Page:HOMEFEATURED WORKTEAMCONTACTSERVICESBLOG 







 



            To Top        








                     David Fincher                







 



                        09                    

                        Aug                        
                        2013                    




                   		 16 Comments                    


			   		In David FincherLighting 

					By Vashi Nedomansky, ACE                



                    David Fincher: Into The Darkness                

On 09, Aug  2013 | 
                   		 16 Comments 
                     | In David Fincher, Lighting | By Vashi Nedomansky, ACE                    



FacebookTwitterLinkedinPinterestVKRedditBufferXingemailPrintDavid Fincher‘s wonderful House of Cards is very dark. Dark in content, dark in tone and especially dark in visual aesthetics. Characters are shrouded in low light levels even in direct sunlight. It’s ominous, dread inducing and spectacular. It also bucks the trend of high contrast, blue/teal blockbuster looks that have been almost unavoidable in Films and TV for the last 10 years.
I recently completed a color grade on Zombie Night, a feature film starring Darryl Hannah and Anthony Michael Hall in which I applied a similar look that emphasized a darker feel with reduced highlights and color casts to set the tone. Here are some examples from Mr. Fincher’s last 3 films that showcase this look…and a color palette board from the film I just graded.
House of Cards in Washington D.C. Metro rail station

“The Godfather” is commonly referenced as one of the first films to break from conventional cinematography and “go dark”. Gordon Willis ASC was named “The Prince of Darkness” for his conscious decision to use low light levels and soft overhead lighting. He went as far as opting for not having the reflection of lights in the eyes of the actors. The studios were not happy, director Francis Ford Coppola was worried…but the resulting cinematography and impact of the film speaks for itself. The tone and dramatic weight of the epic story were aided and elevated by the Mr. Willis’ breathtaking work.
The Godfather proved less is more in lighting dark scenes
David Fincher is well known for his striking visual style and the immersive worlds he creates. I’ve been lucky enough to work in his offices and speak with Academy Award winning editors Angus Wall and Kirk Baxter who cut The Social Network and The Girl With The Dragon Tattoo. Their attention to detail and level of absolute perfection is second to none. Nothing that ends up on the screen is accidental or arbitrary…every frame is dissected and decided upon. In my view…Fincher’s visuals have leaned towards a more natural, realistic yet absolutely visceral feel over his last 3 projects. Let’s take a peek at what that entails…
 
The Social Network
Natural yet stylized images from The Social Network
From the first scene in a bar…a new aesthetic was displayed in The Social Network. It’s dark…but not with crushed blacks. As a viewer, there is a difference between crushed blacks and compressed dynamics of light. There is clear detail in the shadows but the highlights are lowered and colored. If 100% is pure white light…many of the whites in Fincher’s last 3 projects are at 90% (roughly) which constricts the perceived latitude of the image. These whites are also tinted towards the overall color of the scene. Orange is infused into both day and night scenes in The Social Network. Often blue is the go to night-time color but not so in The Social Network. There are no rules…it’s what feels right and I found it extremely effective here.
 
The Girl With The Dragon Tattoo
Dark visuals for a dark story in The Girl With The Dragon Tattoo
The Girl With The Dragon Tattoo display a continuation of this visual palette. In the winter setting of ambiguous sunlight and endless night…Fincher again compresses the whites and keeps clean and legible blacks. Even though so much occurs at night…the viewer never struggles to see what is occurring or gets lost in the visuals. From glass-lined offices to night-time exterior excursions…everything is pristine and clearly visible even when the light levels are extremely low. This can attributed to the ample latitude of the RED camera, the careful cinematography of Jeff Cronenweth and the color grade itself. The tinting of both orange and blue to entire scenes further blends the color palette of scenes and delivers a very hyper-real look. It’s set in the real world but pushes the boundaries to enhance the drama of the story.
 
House of Cards
House of Cards further pushes the limits or darkness
A new low is reached in House of Cards. Scenes play out in extreme darkness. At the inauguration of the President…the scene is played out during the day but it feels and looks like midnight. The sunlight is white but it is so muted and desaturated that it seems like it is only there as a courtesy to illuminate the scene. The mids and blacks blend into each other to the point that the whole scene feels black and white. Kevin Spacey’s character is framed dead center and looks to the camera during the shot…he includes the viewer into his world and speaks directly to the camera. It’s eerie, creepy and supremely effective. I saw the raw RED footage at Fincher’s post production offices and all of it was perfectly exposed and dare I say…bright. I can see that the final images were all a creative decision to push the limits and deliver the images that he saw in his head.
During other daylight scenes, the same approach is applied. It’s never blinding sunshine…only the impression that it is daytime. To further imply the constricting and murky world of Washington politics…night-time scenes often allow just enough information to barely make out the characters. We strain to see the emotions and thought process of the actors as they are blanketed by low light levels and no fill lights to make them pop. This is a new kind of realism in cinematography where conventional lighting is thrown out and the onus is on us to extract what we need from what little we can see. It’s enough…but barely. It makes the audience work and pay attention to keep up with the story. Visual darkness represents and defines the cutthroat morality of the series. I personally love it. Some don’t. To each their own.
 
GONE GIRL
The darkness gets deeper in GONE GIRL
Most recently, GONE GIRL (2014) continues and expands upon the darkness and shrouds the characters within world of buried secrets and impenetrable blackness. Make no mistake…the visual depiction is not murky or muddy…it is a dismal, colorful bleakness that infuses and envelops the film. It matches the tone of the tale.
 
My take-away from watching the last 4 projects by David Fincher is that he’s utilizing quickly evolving technologies (RED, color correction, LED lighting) to redefine the visual boundaries of what is the minimum needed to represent and tell the story. It’s bold and radically different from let’s say…an episode of CSI or Transformers. It’s reality enhanced and a new take on what is considered natural light filmmaking. Then in post production/color grading, the midtones and highlights are lowered to bring down the overall brightness BUT most importantly…the blacks are never crushed so that the shadow detail is always retained. The final image is “Dark Clarity” and matches the mood and tone of his last 3 projects.
 
Zombie Night
Finally…here are all 2050 color graded shots from the film Zombie Night which is scheduled to come out Halloween 2013. I chose to embody many of the principles and sensibilities that David Fincher used on my grade of the film. I will follow up with a more detailed examination and explanation of my post production process once the film comes out and I’m allowed to share all my assets and workflow. Zombie Night was shot on RED and I had 9 days to grade the entire feature on Davinci Resolve in my home studio. I was given three 4TB drives and colored at 1/2 resolution to get real-time playback. A lot of coffee and vodka made the whirlwind 9 days fly by. I exported to ProRes HQ and kicked out a XML for the final online.
Zombie Night – 2050 RED shots color graded in 9 days
Thank you for hanging on to the end and letting me ramble about only one of the aspects that contribute to the making of an effective film. I’ve been watching the choices in David Fincher’s last 3 projects and thought it worthy to discuss in the way that I see it and its relevance in the current state of cinematography and storytelling. Let me know your thought below!
Until next time…
Vashi Nedomansky
vashivisuals.com
@vashikoo
Vashi Nedomansky, ACEMy biography: VashiVisuals Team.
FacebookTwitterLinkedinPinterestVKRedditBufferXingemailPrint Tags | cinematography, filmmaking






Comments





            August 10, 2013            

Reply
Martin


I really enjoyed House Of Cards.  It haa a wonderful look, and also a great costume design. As the other Fincher outings, all in it is very consistent.
Look forward for the Zonbie Night workflow. By the way in that section you mention that you were given “three 4 GB drives”. Should it be TBs?






            August 10, 2013            

Reply
vashi


Thanks for the comment Martin. I agree…House of Cards is firing on all cylinders. You’re right about the GB/TB! Nice catch…will go update it now.








            August 12, 2013            

Reply
Brian Wilcox


This is a wonderful breakdown. Living in Baltimore, having seen many real locations now onscreen, I’ve been fascinated with all things House of Cards & Social Network. You were spot on in illustrating how color can be such an emotive thing. Can’t wait to see how this influenced your grading.






            August 12, 2013            

Reply
vashi


Thank you for the kind words Brian. I’m glad you enjoyed the post. Color and grading has such an impact on the story and the feel of a film/show. Once the producers clear the footage…I will be able to share stills and video from Zombie Nights and I will also be doing a breakdown of the entre color workflow with the RED footage and Davinci Resolve. Stay tuned!…






            August 14, 2013            

Reply
Brian Wilcox


No problem man, you’ve really built out a great blog / site. Can’t wait to hear the resolve / premiere workflow once the producers clear the footage. 
I’m still working w/ DSLR’s but can’t wait to make the jump to RED’s and C300’s










            August 12, 2013            

Reply
Jason Bowdach


Very interesting seeing his visual style evolve, and be adapted to the best technology to tell the story and represent the characters “inner” thoughts thought visuals. Interesting seeing all the shots from ur latest grade, neat to see how the whole picture has some “color continuity” even using very small clips






            August 12, 2013            

Reply
Jason Bowdach


Forgot to mention, Id love to hear more about your edit and grading workflow for Zombie Night.






            August 12, 2013            

Reply
vashi


Thanks again Jason for the support! I will doing an entire post on the grading workflow as soon as I get clearance from the producers. I will be able to go in-depth and show full stills and videos of how I work. Coming soon!






            August 12, 2013            

Reply
Jason Bowdach


Excellent! Cant wait for the more info on it , more details the better. I’m like a sponge for this CC \ grading knowledge, great complement to my evolving editing skills . Feels like I discovered the lost magic lamp! So much












            October 8, 2013            

Reply
hazem abdulrab


I love this low level lighting look and it would be great if you did a tutorial on this color grading. I have a basic idea of how to do it but would like to see how you would do it. Also I read the low budget action cutting post you did and i cant wait to test that out especially cutting 2 frames before impact and Ill shoot at 22 fps. Looking forward to your other posts.






            July 13, 2014            

Reply
vashi


Thank you Hazem. I will have some specific color grading posts coming soon addressing this style.
Stand by!








            October 16, 2013            

Reply
Charles-Etienne Pascal


Thank you for this great article. You made some very good and clear observations. Truly interesting and inspiring!  Thanks again my friend!






            July 13, 2014            

Reply
vashi


Thank you for the kind words Charles. More to come like this soon!








            January 6, 2014            

Reply
Wes


Hey Vashi…I love how you compiled the all the clips for zombie night…how do you do that? I think it would help on any project to get an overall sense of where the color palette is at any given time…thanks in advance






            January 10, 2014            

Reply
vashi


Thanks Wes! I just made screencaps of the Davinci Resolve project in Lightbox mode and compiled them in Photoshop. Hope that helps!








            October 2, 2014            

Reply
Jason Bowdach


Awesome revisit to the article for Gone Girl! Its really opening my eyes for dropping gamma and highlights w/o crushing them for style. Thanks as always for the well organized info, Vashi!

















Submit a Comment




Cancel Reply 




Name                * 



Mail 
                * 



Website 
            * 

Message *







 






Connect with Vashi





Subscribe for Updates 









Email Address*



First Name



Last Name

 
				* = required field			






Most Popular Right Now 
18 Free Effects for After Effects & Premiere Pro [Plugins] 

3K 4K 5K 6K Aspect Ratio Free Templates 

117 Free Film Grain & Light Leaks forFilm & Video Editors 
Speaking Venues Include:Active Member of:Recent Projects



















Categories 
1-Page Film School

6 Below

After Effects

After Effects Templates

American Cinema Editors

Audio

Average Shot Length

Big Ned

Cinemash

Cinematography

Color Grading

David Fincher

Deadpool

Documentary

Editing

Film Internships

Film Score

HEADLOCK

Indie Films

Kubrick

Lighting

Low Budget Filmmaking

One sheet

One Sheets

Photography

Premiere Pro

Premiere Pro Templates

Production

Raiders of the Lost Ark

Ringtones

Screenplay

sharknado

Shot on Kodak

Split Diopter

Star Wars

Storyboard vs. Film

Tests

Uncategorized

Vashi Frames

VFX


  Recent Posts 

VashiFrames: 120 STAR WARS wide shots


Vashi Frames: STAR WARS (1977) – The Trench Run


What is a Future Technology Goal for Filmmaking?


How to Become a Film Editor: Getting Started


Vashi Frames: STAR WARS: THE RISE OF SKYWALKER (2019)


Archives 
December 2019
November 2019
October 2019
September 2019
August 2019
July 2019
June 2019
May 2019
April 2019
March 2019
February 2019
January 2019
December 2018
November 2018
October 2018
August 2018
July 2018
June 2018
May 2018
April 2018
March 2018
February 2018
January 2018
December 2017
November 2017
October 2017
September 2017
August 2017
July 2017
June 2017
April 2017
February 2017
December 2016
November 2016
October 2016
September 2016
August 2016
May 2016
April 2016
March 2016
February 2016
January 2016
December 2015
November 2015
October 2015
September 2015
August 2015
May 2015
April 2015
February 2015
January 2015
December 2014
November 2014
October 2014
September 2014
August 2014
July 2014
June 2014
May 2014
April 2014
March 2014
February 2014
January 2014
December 2013
November 2013
October 2013
September 2013
August 2013
July 2013
June 2013
May 2013
April 2013
March 2013
February 2013
January 2013
January 2012
February 2011

 







  Recent Posts 

VashiFrames: 120 STAR WARS wide shots


Vashi Frames: STAR WARS (1977) – The Trench Run


What is a Future Technology Goal for Filmmaking?


How to Become a Film Editor: Getting Started



Recent Commentsshazz mahfudz on VashiZoom – Premiere Pro Preset EffectsAOTG.com - Post Production News, Websites, Articles, Videos, Blogs & More! For Film and Video, Editing, VFX, Sound, Colour, and Animation on How to Edit a Music Video: 5 Adobe Music Video Editing TipsAOTG.com - Post Production News, Websites, Articles, Videos, Blogs & More! For Film and Video, Editing, VFX, Sound, Colour, and Animation on 18 Free Effects for After Effects & Premiere Pro [Plugins]AOTG.com - Post Production News, Websites, Articles, Videos, Blogs & More! For Film and Video, Editing, VFX, Sound, Colour, and Animation on Photographers Becoming Filmmakers: Editing the Shopbop Video Ad 
Recent Projects
































Connect with Vashi
































