










David Fincher Talks Mindhunter Netflix Series - David Fincher Is Still Fascinated By Serial Killers




































































                    Search
                






Subscribe

Print Edition
Digital Edition
Give a Gift


Entertainment

TV
Movies
Books
Music
Best of 2020


Style

Fashion
Grooming
Accessories
Big Black Book


Food

Restaurants
Recipes


Drinks

Bars
Cocktail Recipes


Sports
Lifestyle

Cars & Tech
Fitness & Health
Money & Career


News & Politics

Charles P. Pierce


Archive
Newsletter
Follow

facebook
twitter
google+
pinterest
tumblr
instagram
youtube


Win
United States

US
UK
España
Italia
Nederland
Japan




Do Not Sell My Info




            Privacy Notice
        

            Terms of Use
        










Editions:
US
UK
España
Italia
Nederland
Japan


















					Subscribe
				


Sign In



My Account
Sign Out




















Type keyword(s) to search










		Every product was carefully curated by an Esquire editor. We may earn a commission from these links.

			





Merrick Morton / Netflix



David Fincher Is Still Fascinated By Serial Killers
The director of Seven returns to familiar material with his new Netflix series, Mindhunter.










Adam Grant




											Oct 13, 2017
					




The first rule of interviewing David Fincher: Don’t talk about Fight Club. He directed that movie, along with Seven, Gone Girl, Zodiac, The Girl With the Dragon Tattoo, and The Social Network. He’s also an executive producer of House of Cards. One of the most meticulous creators in film and television returns to familiar territory on October 13 with Mindhunter, a Netflix drama about how the FBI first developed techniques to catch serial killers and rapists.





Adam Grant: What’s the best piece of career advice you’ve ever received? David Fincher: Joel Schumacher, who I consider to be one of the wisest people I’ve ever met, once told me a great thing: “You have to be very careful not to become the only person who cares, because then they have you. You have to be prepared at any moment to say, ‘You guys seem like you have it all under control and you have a very clear idea about what it is that you want. Why don’t you just do that? Why do you need me to be involved?’ ” The only way you’re ever going to be in control of what it is that you’re doing is to be prepared to not be involved.I look at directors who say, “Well, I just have to do something. I haven’t done a movie in two years.” I’m like, “Really? You have to do something?” I feel like you shouldn’t do something—you should do the thing. You should be ready to go to the mat for it. You should be ready to say, “This is the way that this should be done.” So don’t care too much. That’s an unfair paraphrasing, but what Joel meant was you have to somehow impart how much you care about stuff to a number of other people and get them to care. You can’t think of it in terms of what you’re going to get out of it. You have to think of it in terms of planned obsolescence. “I’ll never be finished with it; at some point it’ll be finished with me.”



I feel like you shouldn’t do something—you should do the thing.



You’re rumored to be perfectionistic in reshooting scenes. Is that true? How do you know when creative work is done? That’s a lot of bullshit. Among the lazy I would be considered a perfectionist. I have scenes in many of the movies or television that I’ve made where it’s simply you missed it, you didn’t get it, and you have to kind of then rethink it and go, “Where does the best material take us?” I just don’t believe in cutting a sequence based on “Well, this guy wasn’t having a good day, so we’re going to play off him onto somebody else.” That’s unfair to the actor, and unfair to the audience. I feel like it’s my job to let the structure of the images be decided by what the story needs, as opposed to what the performances will allow. We’re playing dress-up —it’s not like you’re asking someone to go through open-heart surgery again.I think that cinema is hopefully a kind of creative Darwinism, and the best ideas prevail. Part of my job as director is to put blinders on people, and you’re trying to put blinders on yourself so that you don’t get bogged down in minutiae that no one will ever experience or will ever accrue to a greater value of understanding or appreciation of the final product. But you also have to leave yourself open enough that when something happens that should be a part of your story, you don’t steamroll it looking at the schedule or looking at the sun.













Netflix

You seem to be drawn to these people who live very dark lives, or have very dark things that go on in their minds. Seven is sort of gloriously absurd in the canon of the criminal masterminds. It’s interesting to me; I don’t know if it’s interesting to anyone else. There was always a house in any neighborhood that I ever lived in that all the kids on the street wondered, “What are those people up to?” We sort of attach the sinister to the mundane in order to make things interesting. I think that there’s a tendency for the human mind to work that way. I think it’s also because in order for something to be evil, it almost has to cloak itself as something else.What are you hoping to do to your audiences? Is the goal to make people terrified that everyone they meet might be a serial killer?Listen, should we help people look for their lost animals? Probably. Should third graders help strangers look for lost animals? Not in this day and age. I would hope that as human beings we would make ourselves available to helping people who are in need. But the reason these predators continue to fascinate us is that we want to write this behavior off as madness. Yet to be a serial killer, you have to kill at least three people—which means you have to not get caught with the first two. For that to happen, you have to be fairly thoughtful in premeditation. It’s the hiding in plain sight. That’s the thing that I find terrifying about them.What have you learned about the minds of profilers?The Silence of the Lambs was an incredible recruiting tool for the FBI. They were asking me, “Is Mindhunter going to be like Silence of the Lambs?” No. Investigators are criminal masterminds, in a certain way, but very sad. When you engage with this kind of inhumanity, it comes at a cost. We gift them with these superpowers, but really they are just very thoughtful hunters. They have to imagine every permutation. “What if the killer does this? What if the victim does this?” They have to work this stuff out in advance. It’s not Anthony Hopkins; it’s not a gourmet chef, sommelier, and chess master. These killers are abused, confused, and evil people. This show is much more about following the trail of inhumanity.



Investigators are criminal masterminds, in a certain way, but very sad. When you engage with this kind of inhumanity, it comes at a cost.



If you could go into any writers’ room and be a fly on the wall, where would you go?I’d probably go to The Sopranos Season Five or Six. I would like to watch David Chase work. It seems like a very complete world in somebody’s head. And then maybe Deadwood Season One. At one point, I was two millimeters from saying yes to directing the pilot, and part of it was I was just so fascinated with David Milch. Milch and Chase are masterful. They both have a great ear as to how things can be presented or how you can get things out of characters. I think that’s an odd gift, and it intrigues me.













Netflix

You’re working on your fourth film with Brad Pitt. What’s the secret of that connection?The gift of that relationship that keeps on giving is that we have a very similar appreciation of the great cosmic joke. It’s like we don’t even need words. You’ve reached a point where you just like, “[gibberish],” and you can kind of communicate in guttural utterances.A film is a stand-alone creative product; a show is an ongoing story. How would you contrast directing in those two worlds?In movies, there’s almost no room for characterization anymore, and in television there’s no money for plot. The monetary constraints in television tend to make most of your entertainment value about characterization. The antithesis is true in movies because no one’s interested in anyone’s backstory or how conflicted they are, but in what they’re doing or whether or not something resonates with them. You’re there to thwart the destruction of the world. On a movie set, you’re the general; people work for the director. In television, you work for the show and you may not ever meet this director again. There’s a tendency to see the director as a migrant worker. These aren’t long-term relationships. The urgency is different—there’s no navel-gazing.In TV, with so little time for management by walking around, let alone actually getting to know people, how do you build relationships with your team?I pride myself on being half an hour early and leaving half an hour after everyone else, and I make myself available to answer any questions. On House of Cards and on Mindhunter, in the first couple weeks people would come in and say, “What’s for lunch?”This article appears in the November '17 issue of Esquire.Subscribe to Esquire

























More From
TV








How to Enjoy The Witcher Games and Books






CBS's 'Evil' Tackled Medical Racism



Advertisement - Continue Reading Below







Joey Sasso is 'The Circle''s Most Lovable Bro







Everything We Know About 'Atlanta' Season Three







Six Theories on How 'The Good Place' Will End






The Lasting Importance of Party of Five








'Cheer' Goes Into the Pain of College Athletics






'Schitt's Creek' Has Always Been Stevie's Story







Shubham Is the Best Person On 'The Circle'







The Law of Surprise in 'The Witcher' Explained










TV


Entertainment


Watch David Fincher's New 'Mindhunter' Trailer


David Fincher's New Netflix Drama Looks Creepy


A Conversation With Mindhunter's BTK Killer


The Curious Case of David Fincher


'Serial' Is Coming to TV, But Not How You Think


David Letterman Is Returning to Television

























































Newsletter
Digital Editions
About Us
Media Kit
Press Room
Contact Us
Community Guidelines
Advertise Online
Customer Service
Subscribe
Other Hearst Subscriptions
Give a Gift
Events & Promotions
Giveaways

A Part of Hearst Digital Media

				Esquire participates in various affiliate marketing programs, which means we may get paid commissions on editorially chosen products purchased through our links to retailer sites.
			

©2020 Hearst Magazine Media, Inc. All Rights Reserved.
Privacy Notice
Your California Privacy Rights
Interest-Based Ads
Terms of Use
Site Map


Do Not Sell My Info






























